the close range of this photograph of peeling paint precludes the viewer from gaining any foothold into the space of the picture, emphasizing its ultimate flatness. siskind was especially drawn to surfaces that resembled the canvases of the abstract expressionist painters, with whom he was friends.
metal hook is one of siskind\'s first photographs that truly focuses on the abstract visual language of ordinary objects.  the flatness of the image as a whole also serves to assert the graphic quality of the metal hook itself as a sign/symbol for male and female, thus suggesting a level of content in addition to that of form.'.
one of siskind\'s later works, recife (olinda) 8 was taken during his travels in northeastern brazil.  the result is that we are forced to remain as viewers attached to the abstract surface - noting with pleasure the additional details of age, texture, misaligned lines, and accidental drips.'.
siskind\'s first pictures show a decidedly more straightforward approach to picture making than the later work for which he became known. although the male figure is a specific individual and technically the focal point, he is flattened in his own reflection against the back wall, pressed into the service of the overall design of the photograph.
the blue series followed the red series of paintings and this is one of its most successful examples. the rectangular shapes of various shades of blue and green are suspended within a resplendent azure surface.
this is one of the paintings belonging to the red series. here the artist immersed himself completely into the exploration of the color red, one of the most expressive among the primary colors.
in this famous cartoon of 1946 ad reinhardt tried to encapsulate the essence of the artistic modernism with its history and inherent conflicts within the american context. the tree of modern art has its roots deep in history - the greeks are here, and so are persian miniatures and japanese prints.
this early composition by ad reinhardt exhibits the artist\'s profound interest and understanding of the cubist art of pablo picasso and george braque. the palette is typical of the style and is comprised of four colors essential for a cubist painting: black, white, brown, and gray.
here he is obviously quoting stuart davis, the american artist who was a key influence on young reinhardt. painted in the same year as the cubist gouache, this canvas presents quite a stark contrast with reinhardt\'s earlier artistic pursuits.
in 1962, the date of this painting, gottlieb spoke about the emotional quality of color in his work. beginning in 1956, gottlieb\'s monumental burst paintings developed from the imaginary landscapes, focusing on a simplification of space and color from the earlier series.
painted just a year before gottlieb\'s death, this is one of the last in this series of burst paintings. the picture\'s elongated form echoes the vertical composition of his earlier paintings, emphasizing the empty space between the lower and upper portions of the picture.
gottlieb began his imaginary landscapes series in 1951. this stylistic shift is reinforced by the imaginary landscapes\' addition of brighter tones and colors than the earlier pictographs.
the first of gottlieb\'s unstill life series dates from 1948, but this is a larger and later work from the same series. here, gottlieb employs an uncompromising degree of abstraction and modern slickness with its palette of blacks, grays, and reds.
vigil confronts us directly with several mask-like faces that suggest nonwestern sources (african, sepik e.g.) against a dark background that suggests night, and perhaps the need to be watchful. this painting is typical of gottlieb\'s pictograph paintings with the geometric compartmentalization of the flat space and its use of seemingly mythic signs and symbols.
after leaving new york permanently and traveling through america and canada, martin returned to new mexico to live in isolation.  although martin did not activate her filmmaking career, gabriel was another effort in exploring landscape, prompting an understanding of humans through their reaction to nature.'.
around 1964, martin began using acrylic paint rather than oil and simultaneously replaced colored pencils with graphite. martin in fact claimed that the idea of a grid first entered her mind when she was thinking about the innocence of trees.
martin destroyed much of her work made before the late 1950s when she shifted to a grid format, so works from this period of her oeuvre are scarce. her early style has been compared to that of arshile gorky and, like his works, untitled displays martin\'s debt to surrealism and abstract expressionism.
untitled xxi is an example of martin\'s work after the mid-1970s. though untitled xxi is not explicitly designated as a landscape, by name or representation, martin throughout her artistic life attempted to capture the sublime of everyday nature through her continued variation on the square format.
with window, martin\'s forms became less organic and more rigid as she experimented with rectangular forms, anticipating the later introduction of the grid\'s mathematical precision in her work. although this work was created during the first years of martin\'s final return to new york, window still incorporates a southwestern palette, while abandoning the curved line of earlier work.
dropping a han dynasty urn, an early work by the artist, demonstrates his show-stopping conceptual brilliance, and desire to provoke controversy. the han dynasty is considered a defining moment in chinese civilization.
study of perspective tiananmen square was part of a series begun in 1995 and completed in 2003. in what first appears to be a classic tourist snapshot, ai sticks his middle finger up at tiananmen square gate.
surveillance camera, an austere and quite beautiful marble sculpture, reminds us that the artist is watching those who watch him. the artist, in turn, tracks the surveillance cameras, vans, and plain-clothes police officers that monitor his gates.
this work compresses a ton of traditional pu\'er tea leaves into the space of one cubic meter. while in the west, drinking tea (especially from chinese porcelain) has historically been a status symbol, tea is the everyday drink in china.
ryder\'s moon both illuminates and obscures through the shadows it casts. the painting is one of ryder\'s most abstract, until closer observation draws us past its compositionally powerful surface and we appreciate the represented scene more fully.
the rhine maidens are begging siegfried to return the magic ring and escape its curse. but the metaphor of the inch worm is modest too, even a little self-deprecating.
the space is compositionally anchored around the dead tree to the left of center. the two figures and a similarly placed tree feature in shakespearean scene: as you like it, painted by francis hayman around 1750.
this is a relatively small painting, about a foot (or 30cm) square. one way of thinking about this is that turner was an obsessive observer of the actual sea in all its moods while ryder\'s sea is an inner vision of tumult and the search for respite.
re-focus and, as the detail resolves once more, joseph\'s gesture towards the extraordinarily small cross on the dark ground takes on a powerful poignancy. in this way, the painting tells us a great deal about ryder\'s interest in what we might see by looking into his paintings deeply enough.
although sculpture is the medium for which giacometti is best known, he was also an accomplished painter and draughtsman.  much as some of the leading existentialist thinkers of the time noted, giacometti\'s mature work was an antidote to abstraction.'.
 by this time giacometti was well acquainted with existentialism, and city square could be interpreted along its lines, depicting as it does mankind as a mere shadow of itself, existing half-way between being and nothingness.' the multi-figured city square, while not giacometti\'s first foray into the waif-like figures for which he is best known, is a stunning exercise in creating an impression of spacious landscape.
hands holding the void illustrates how giacometti started to stray from the surrealists after his brief association with the group. the void the figure is holding is possibly the soul, or what the egyptians called k.
in fact, following the 1930 group exhibition, salvador dal contributed an article on surrealist objects for breton\'s periodical, inspired by suspended ball. although works like gazing head caught the attention of the surrealists, it was suspended ball, first exhibited at galerie pierre in 1930, that prompted andr breton to invite giacometti to join the group.
like other works in this vein, woman of venice ii shows a single figure, her body seemingly beaten almost to the point of disintegration, yet still standing tall and upright. man on a pavement like burning iron; who cannot lift his heavy feet.".
while he returned to larger dimensions later, ada in the water emphasizes simple shape over the painterly mark in a relatively spare economy of means. setting himself apart from the avant-garde, katz started to work in a small format that directly opposed the grand scale of abstract expressionism.
black brook 11 is a black and white waterscape, composed of textural brushstrokes that recall his early paintings. katz returned to the black brook series throughout the 1980s and 1990s in an effort to reassess landscape painting.
red smile is nearly ten feet wide, and is one of his largest portraits to date. this work exemplifies katz\'s highly polished, mature technique where there is little trace of the work\'s making.
the black dress is depicted flatly, and contributes a characteristic tension between flatness and three-dimensionality. this popular painting shows his wife wearing a classic little black dress and, quite unusually, repeated in a variety of poses.
winter scene is composed of quick, painterly brushstrokes, and the scene at once echoes impressionistic plein-air painting as well as fauve and abstract expressionist technique. the sober, delicate shades of gray characterize many of his earlier paintings, while the insistent, openly luminous off-white demonstrates his penchant for color fields that is seen in his later works.
from the 1930s on, calder created non-mechanized hanging, standing, and wall-mounted mobiles, whose movement was driven by random air currents.  though many other artists have since created works based on his principles, even now, decades later, calder is still the undisputed master of this form of sculpture.'.
counterpoint to his mobiles, calder created many stabiles, composed of intersecting shaped planes of bolted sheet metal, often painted a single color. devil fish was the first larger-scale stabile calder made.
calder\'s illustrations for the national police gazette were often made of single, continuous lines. his several sculptures of dancer josephine baker were his earliest works in this direction.
this balanced and precise geometric composition underlines rodchenko\'s preoccupation with engineering and design that he maintained throughout his career. by 1920, rodchenko no longer felt obliged to imbue his basic geometric figures with distinguishable layers of color.
rodchenko attended a lecture by russian futurists wassily kamensky, david burliuk, and vladimir mayakovsky, in kazan in 1912, and was immediately converted.  however, rodchenko soon grew disinterested in the style and, following this, he began to create even more abstract pictures, putting aside entirely the last suggestions of illusion that dance creates.'.
this is an early example of his work for russian industry, advertising red october confectionary. when rodchenko abandoned painting in 1921, he also abandoned many of the traditional attitudes of the artist as a commentator on society and began instead to put his talents in the service of the russian industry and the nascent revolution.
non-objective painting no 80 is typical of this phase in his career and is part of a series of similar "black on black" paintings, which were exhibited alongside five white paintings by malevich in moscow in 1919. rodchenko was powerfully influenced by kazimir malevich\'s suprematism, and particularly by works such as black square (1915), which reduced the components of the painting to a single black square that echoed the shape of the canvas.
often credited with devising the key principles of modern photography, rodchenko is praised for his use of unusual angles and perspective. this is one of rodchenko\'s finest photographs.
painted in a style heavily influenced by whistler, this work was a critical success for maurer, winning the gold medal at the juried carnegie international exhibition in 1901.  the effect is a meditative mood that is created by the painterly qualities of line and color.'.
around 1919, maurer began two series, girls and heads, to which he would return until the end of his life. he adopted a relatively standard format, positioning his sitters alone or in small groups, most often in a simple frontal pose and three-quarter length.
rather than using color descriptively, he now embraced its suggestive and emotional potential, using unnatural tones to create a sense of energy or mood. with bold compositions such as this, maurer quickly became the most famous american fauve artist, incorporating the bold colors, abstract forms, and flat space of that style.
 impressionist artists began capturing this new subject matter, creating genres that were distinct from the limitations of the academy.' footbridge at argenteuil (1872) is a landscape painting that captures modern life at the end of the 19th century.
haystacks at moret, morning represents france as a fertile, agrarian country, bountiful in its resources. the massive landscape includes a peasant working in the field to illustrate the monumental scale of the haystacks.
the bridge at villeneuve-la-garenne (1872) represents an impressionist landscape along the riverbank of the seine. additionally, sisley included figures to provide a sense of scale to convey the bridge\'s size.
stieglitz\'s cloud series - equivalents - captured ephemeral formations in the sky. this photo is divided between dark, black clouds on the left and bright sky on the right.
this nighttime scene was taken from the window of stieglitz\'s famous avant-garde gallery. the overall darkness is leavened by intermittent beacons of artificial light.
the steerage depicts travelers boarding a crowded steamer going from new york to bremen, germany. for stieglitz, the picture was far more important as a study in line and form.
winter, fifth avenue shows the busy new york street in the midst of a snowstorm. stieglitz stalked fifth avenue for three frigid hours waiting for the perfect moment.
one of neel\'s best-known works, this portrait of the legendary figure contrasts dramatically with the glamorous image warhol cultivated for himself. his eyes are closed, suggesting sadness, and discomfort with being looked at (warhol was famously sensitive about his looks).
this early work depicts neel\'s husband, the painter carlos enrquez, a year after they were married. the portrait displays many of the stylistic and compositional features evident in her mature work.
neel moved from greenwich village to spanish harlem in 1938. in this respect, many of her paintings from spanish harlem recall the aesthetics of american documentary photographers such as berenice abbott and dorothea lange.
neel\'s passionate interest in left-wing politics is evident in her portrayal of communist activist and union organizer pat whalen, whom she painted when she was involved with the wpa, part of president franklin roosevelt\'s new deal. here, whalen is portrayed as the archetypal blue-collar worker.
neel was one of the first (if not the first) octogenarian woman to exhibit a portrait of herself as a nude. it depicts neel in the nude, sitting on a striped chair in her studio.
in this happening, the public was invited to complete a number of tasks using instructions outlined in a score.  kaprow authorized a reinvention of this piece just a few weeks before his death and it was performed in munich\'s haus der kunst in november of 2006.'.
baby is an action collage, made from randomly assembled objects juxtaposed with cut-up pieces of kaprow\'s own paintings. kaprow produced the work in a frenzied, ritualistic process, influenced by the gestural quality of pollock\'s action painting.
this 1957 work represents a shift from the art object to the surrounding environment. each time rearrangeable panels was exhibited, the curator or artist would be forced to make choices about how to configure the panels, foreshadowing kaprow\'s use of audience participation.
kaprow produced the extended piece, trading dirt, when studying at the zen center of san diego.  a film, trading dirt with simon rodia and allan kaprow by rosie lee hooks and paul s. rogers, was created for the allan kaprow: art as life exhibition at moca geffen contemporary in spring 2008 in addition to a reinvention of the piece.'.
words, exhibited at the smolin gallery in new york in 1962, takes the audience on a journey through two rooms, encouraging them to contribute to written and verbal components as they progress. through this interactive environment, kaprow denotes "urban text" referencing graffiti, billboards, newspapers, overheard conversations, and a lecture, engaging the viewer in a multi-sensory experience that literally brings "words" to life.
this striking poster was created as an advertisement for the job cigarette company. a beautiful woman with a lighted cigarette dominates mucha\'s poster, the rising smoke intertwining with her swirling, pre-raphaelite hair and the job logo.
created at the turn of the century, this illustrated book marks the point when mucha\'s own spiritual philosophy entered his work. in his book, mucha created an image for each line of the lord\'s prayer,with his own symbolic interpretations thereof.
mucha painted slavia/josephine as his ultimate \'mucha woman,\' with her hair, body, and clothing creating graceful forms in front of a richly ornamented background. the goddess slavia was a recurring icon both in mucha\'s commercial and fine art work, and on posters and logos for the slavia bank.
the bracelet is also impressively utilitarian: mucha\'s son jiri said that the bracelet was designed to accommodate bernhardt\'s arthritic wrist! mucha\'s interest in expanding the boundaries of art and design led to beautiful collaborations with the parisian goldsmith georges fouquet.
the last canvas, the apotheosis of the slavs, which depicts the joy of slav independence, was completed in 1926. both the spiritual blue and the pure white contrast with the reds and oranges of the burning flames of a torched village in the background.
although inspired by brancusi\'s marble work, modigliani\'s sculptures were often made from softer, less expensive limestone, as in this work. head\'s graceful contours and abstracted features suggest brancusi\'s influence, while the elongated proportions - specifically, the swan-like neck - is reminiscent of ancient egyptian busts, among the non-western art forms that influenced modigliani\'s work.
this double portrait of jacques lipchitz and his wife, berthe, exemplifies modigliani\'s talent for eliciting the inner life of his subjects.  wanting to pay his friend modigliani as much as possible for his work, jacques lipchitz insisted on further changes after its completion; as a result, the painting took nearly two weeks to finish.'.
when modigliani entered into a relationship with the nineteen-year-old jeanne hebuterne, his close friends hoped that the serious young woman would inspire modigliani to curb his excesses. although there were no fundamental changes in his behavior, modigliani\'s portraits of his young lover suggest the artist\'s newfound sense of peace and serenity.
 such features of the modigliani painting likely contributed to the uproar generated by the artist\'s now legendary exhibition at berthe weill\'s gallery in 1917.' modigliani\'s nudes are often frank depictions of sensuality that frequently reference the traditional handling of this theme, but without the mythological context of their artistic precursors.
the jewess was the first painting modigliani sold after settling in paris in 1906.  the painting is also one of the few jewish-themed works by modigliani, who was of sephardic jewish descent and publically embraced his jewish identity.'.
by 1978 mendieta\'s siluetas and films had given way to a body of work consisting of forms carved into rock, made from sand, or etched into clay. she created a series of these works while in cuba in 1981, and collectively entitled the pieces esculturas rupestres (rock sculptures).
the figure could be a robed madonna, but the red, skeletal imprint unsettles these associations and reveals mendieta\'s interest in indigenous religious practices such as human sacrifice. this piece signifies her criticism by subverting this convent\'s history of evangelization through positioning her ritualistic piece within the hallowed vaulted alcove meant to display catholic religious figures.
in 1972, mendieta recruited a fellow iowa university student to help her create untitled (facial hair transplant). untitled (facial hair transplant) is a blatant manipulation that evinces the artist\'s interest in the fluidity of her body and its gender identification.
mendieta\'s work on her silueta series (spanish for "silhouette") in the 1970s established her among the ranks of artists exploring the emerging genres of land art, body art, and performance art.  it also eloquently speaks to her concerns surrounding belonging and rootedness, and an underlying reliance on her female mysticism.'.
later that same year, mendieta worked with blood as her primary material once again. in untitled (people looking at blood, moffit), she spread animal blood and viscera on the sidewalk outside her house, so that it looked to passersby as if the blood were leaking out from under her closed doorway.
in response to the incident, and as a vehicle to express the horror of male sexual violence, mendieta staged a poignant and shocking performance. mendieta had carefully recreated the scene of ottens\' murder as was reported by the police.
in 2001, he made a related piece, 99 cent ii, diptych of two ninety-nine cent store interiors. this enormous photograph (over 6 by 11 feet) depicts the interior of a ninety-nine cent store in los angeles.
amazon (2016) is a grand thirteen by eight-foot photograph depicting the inside of an amazon distribution center in phoenix, arizona. furthermore, he states, "my repetitive pictorial patterns and your minimalistic structures of sound overlap.".
bahrain i, (2005) is a photograph depicting the motorsport racetrack that plays host to bahrain\'s annual formula one grand prix. a helicopter ride helped gursky capture a large enough portrait of the track so that the resulting portrait becomes one the viewer is not ordinarily privy to.
this piece is a large color chromogenic print depicting the chicago board of trade building. chicago, board of trade, ii is part of a series of related images of international stock exchanges including singapore simex and the hong kong stock exchange.
gursky has a great passion for the electronic music scene. may day ii depicts a crowd of people during a concert at mayday, the oldest and most renowned german electronic music festival that draws thousands of people every year.
the rhine ii, (1999) is depicting a stretch of the river outside dsseldorf. the rhine ii showcases gursky\'s regular dialogue between painting and representation.
this photograph comes from objects of desire, a series of aestheticized close-up photographs of guns taken by serrano in the early 1990s. this element of threat is exemplified by colt d.a. 45, where the viewer feels momentarily in danger, literally at gunpoint.
i did over 100 portraits, it took me three years to do the work, and i photographed people from all walks of life including some celebrities, like donald trump. this photograph comes from the america series that serrano worked on between 2001-04 in the wake of the september 11 terrorist attacks in new york.
serrano gained permission to photograph corpses at an unnamed morgue in an american city, provided that none of the subjects would be recognizable in the images. serrano chose to use a black backdrop for all the images in the series.
this photograph is a closely cropped shot of an unrecognizable person wearing a white pointed ku klux klan hood, standing against a black background. art historian mark thistlethwaite writes that "most museum viewers likely associate violence, hatred, fear, and militancy with the ku klux klan, and few probably have encountered a klan member close up.
serrano was photographing bodily fluids, including blood, milk, semen, and urine, throughout the 1980s. in milk/blood the title reveals serrano\'s use of bodily fluids to create a photograph with the visual qualities of an abstract painting.
so, if piss christ upsets people, maybe this is so because it is bringing the symbol closer to its original meaning." although piss christ was read as sacrilegious and highly contentious in the scandal that followed its display in 1989, serrano insisted that piss christ was not meant to be merely provocative, but should also be seen as a work of devotion.
the male body is also naked, with his flaccid penis positioned very closely to the woman\'s mouth. she stares confidently at the camera whilst embracing the thighs of a young, athletic male body to the right of the image (visible from the knee to the waist).
wyeth presents the viewer with a dead crow, stiffened from rigor mortis and frozen in the wintery landscape. the fields surrounding wyeth\'s neighbor\'s house extend well into the distance, and a farm house and trees dot the horizon.
in this controversial painting, barracoon, a nude black woman reclines on a bed covered in white linens with her back turned toward the viewer. the contemporary artist hank willis thomas suggested that wyeth "exploited, but not maliciously, as part of his brand..
her eyes closed, she appears to be almost smiling, a rare occurrence in the helga paintings. in overflow, the model helga testorf lies on her side, partially covered with a thin, white sheet, revealing her breasts and the top of her pubic area.
the main focal point of the painting - the brown boots - show much wear, suggesting a long history. as is typical for wyeth, the grass and the weeds that comprise the field are rendered with the utmost detail and clarity with his dry brush technique.
in winter 1946, we see a young man running fast and recklessly down a hill. given the biographical context, one can now imagine the young man as wyeth himself, running aimlessly and distractedly while trying to make sense of his father\'s death.
given that ice is such a tricky material these ice works are remarkable for their fragile elegance. goldsworthy\'s ice works showcase his resilience and patience.
moonlit path also functioned as a metaphor for life. moonlit path is a work of incomparable poetry and originality.
rain shadow, times square is one of the latest examples of goldsworthy\'s series of body imprints. in order to capture this rain shadow, goldsworthy positioned himself on the ground in times square before the rain began, remained lying there throughout a storm, and then took a photograph of the \'shadow\' created by his body.
painterly compositions utilizing nature\'s organic colors and forms, such as red leaf patch, are one of goldsworthy\'s trademarks. time passing is the main attribute of red leaf patch.
besides being a permanent work - a lesser-known side of goldsworthy\'s practice - storm king wall can also be seen as political. storm king wall is arguably goldsworthy\'s most ambitious work to date.
with brillo boxes, warhol also has a personal connection. still using the silkscreen technique, this time on plywood, warhol presented the viewer with exact replicas of a commonly used products found in homes and supermarkets.
as in robert motherwell\'s popular stations of the cross series of works, coca-cola is comprised of a large, black mass on a white background. this idea applies the hand-painted portrait of a coca-cola bottle.
in the gold marilyn monroe, warhol further plays on the idea of an icon, placing marilyn\'s face on a very large golden-colored background. warhol, being infatuated with fame and pop culture, obtained a black-and-white publicity photo of her (from her 1953 for her film niagara) and used the photo to create several series of images.
warhol took the black and white image of mao from his little red book (mao\'s famous communist publication), and created hundreds of different sized canvases of the totalitarian ruler. warhol combines paint and silkscreen in this image of mao zedong, a series that he created in direct reaction to president richard nixon\'s 1972 visit to china.
the car crash shown is very similar to the photo of the long island car crash where jackson pollock died in 1956. orange car crash is from the death and disaster series that consumed much of warhol\'s attention in this period.
if i asked someone to do an oxidation painting, and they just wouldn\'t think about it, it would just be a mess. warhol put much thought and design into these works, and is quoted as saying, "[these paintings] had technique, too.
by using repetitive images, each slightly different to the next, and then overlapping the images, warhol produces the illusion of movement. warhol\'s self portraits that he created throughout his career reveal an underlying theme.
all people need to sleep; warhol once again transformed banality into artistic expression. his films were lauded by the art world, and their influence is seen in performance art and expiremental filmmaking to this day.
behind warhol\'s silver wig and black glasses (of campbells soup, marylin, and drug/sex film fame) was a devout catholic who went to mass and volunteered at homeless shelters regularly. warhol\'s religiosity is most exemplified by the late works that he created based on leonardo da vinci\'s the last supper (14951498).
as kapoor explains, "1000 names implies that the objects are part of a much bigger whole.  dismemberment of jeanne d\'arc helps to highlight the fact that however minimal, 1000 names speaks of a path to enlightenment that marries ethereal musings with the importance of flesh.'.
continuing to expand his notion of voids, kapoor treated the swirling water with a black dye to give the illusion of a black hole. kapoor\'s work appears less connected to this earth than smithson\'s, and instead looks more metaphysical.
at almost 280 feet long and 82 feet high, the structure is an imposing sight, demonstrating how kapoor\'s sculpture has become increasingly more monumental. understanding that the sculpture\'s success lies in its size, kapoor explains, "every idea has its scale.
developed with the assistance of engineers, shooting into the corner consists of a pneumatic compressor constructed to resemble a cannon, which loudly shoots 24-pound balls of wax 50 mph across a room and into a corner at 20 minute intervals. it also recalls the dramatic performances made by the viennese actionists during the 1960s, which often involved real raw meat.
commissioned by the nottingham playhouse in england, kapoor\'s first sky mirror is a public sculpture consisting of a 20-foot-wide concave dish angled upwards towards the transient sky. inspired by the realistically depicted landscapes of romantic painter, john constable, sky mirror is a conceptual variation of a landscape painting.
revealing itself only when viewed in profile, when i am pregnant, consists simply of a white bulge protruding seamlessly from the gallery\'s white wall. later, kapoor would continue to explore the same theme and begin to make works that are the inversion of when i am pregnant.
the albers moved to america 1933 when josef was invited to teach at black mountain college in north carolina. anni taught weaving and textile design at black mountain, but also began working with other materials, including jewelry.
in 1965 the jewish museum commissioned albers with the challenging task of memorializing those who died in the holocaust. the panels are not woven uniformly, but rather the black and white threads vary against the structure of the grid.
in the sketches for her wall hangings, albers reveals this combination of weaving technique and modernist design. in 1924, albers published an essay, "bauhaus weaving" that described both a history of weaving and spoke to its future potential.
fallen bicycle of teenage boy just killed by a sniper depicts the aftermath of the death of an innocent boy trapped in the midst of the conflict. in the 1990s leibovitz traveled with sontag to sarajevo to document bosnia\'s bloody struggle to become independent.
in keith haring, she captured the graffiti and pop artist naked and squatting on top of a coffee table with a surprised expression on his face. keith haring also marks the beginning of leibovitz\'s transition to the more concept-driven and staged photography that would come to define her style.
untitled (mick jagger, buffalo, ny) captures one of these moments and has become an emblematic image from the historic tour. after having worked at rolling stone magazine for five years and building her reputation as a skillful rock and roll photographer, leibovitz was asked by mick jagger to be the tour photographer for the rolling stones\' 1975 tour.
queen elizabeth ii at buckingham palace is one in a series of official portraits leibovitz took of the queen, and the first time an american was selected for the task. the ornate, historic white room of buckingham palace provided a dramatic setting without any additional art direction or staging, and the queen is dressed extravagantly to compliment the room.
working on assignment for rolling stone with the legendary journalist hunter s. thompson, leibovitz captured the moment when, after resigning as president, nixon left the white house for the last time. it is both mundane and theatrical- the guards could be stagehands or porters, but the presence of the carpet and the white house setting evokes the pageantry of the state.
untitled (yoko ono; john lennon) depicts the couple in an intimate embrace with a naked lennon curled around a fully clothed ono, lovingly kissing her cheek.  in 2005 the american society of magazine editors voted the image the best magazine cover of the last 40 years.'.
representative of his very large landscapes, bohemia lies by the sea features a rich, complexly interwoven group of symbols, alluding to themes of death, utopia, and renewal. it also refers to german bohemia, now part of the czech republic, that was disputed territory after world war i until annexed by the nazis in 1938.
this motif of the interior was a recurring subject throughout kiefer\'s work of the 1970s, as in his series of attic paintings. some critics missed the irony of the title, german spiritual heroes, and thought the work encouraged a pervasive fascination with german culture, while omitting the legacy of the nation\'s brutality.
for his notorious first body of work, kiefer created a series of photographic self-portraits that confronted, head on, the history of nazi germany. kiefer presented occupations in his first solo exhibition at the galerie am kaiserplatz in karlsruhe, germany in 1969.
an uprooted palm tree, preserved in resin and fiberglass, lies on its side.  here, kiefer juxtaposes the dichotomy of rebirth and regeneration with the uprooted palm tree that resembles a prostrate human figure: the cyclical nature of existence.'.
the books are decorated and interspersed with broken glass that merges with the glass on the floor in front of the work. the lead markers with hebrew inscriptions attached to the bookcase symbolize the ten vessels of the divine essence.
it was also in the 1980s that kiefer expanded his interest in history beyond germany to a more general interest in culture and civilization. complicating the symbolism, the lead books appear worn with time.
indeed, caro later described early one morning as "like a song, moving along in time. early one morning is seen as one of caro\'s boldest and most sophisticated works.
in the 1980s, caro became interested in combining sculptural tropes with architectural ones, creating what he called "sculpitecture"; elephant palace is an important example of such work. in elephant palace, caro presents an architectural \'entrance\' which also seems like a mouth or ears, and a roof which also seems like the domed skull of a large animal.
in 1977, he was working at emma lake in saskatchewan, canada with the sculptor douglas bentham. with these materials he was able to work more spontaneously and instinctively; the resulting sculptures, such as emma dipper, seem almost like line drawings composed in the air.
the millennium bridge combines caro\'s interests in architecture, minimal composition, the material qualities of steel, and engineering. in conversation with norman foster, he noted: "[m]y way of working is quite different from yours, as i discovered when we worked together on the millennium bridge.
since the edge is basic to the table all the table pieces make use of this edge which itself becomes an integral element of the piece." caro noted that "my table pieces are not models inhabiting a pretence world, but relate to a person like a cup or a jug.
as a student, and while working for henry moore, caro had produced experimental works which nonetheless remained within the bounds of figurative modelling. the circular form behind the central trapezoid shape, meanwhile, might imply an affinity with the american painter kenneth noland, whose work caro had encountered in the us, and which often features concentric rings.
anthony caro\'s early sculptures differ greatly from the abstract works which he began to construct from welded steel from the early 1960s onwards, and for which he would become famous. woman waking up is similar to moore\'s work in its abstract anthropomorphic form, but eschews his direct carving technique in favor of the more old-fashioned process of modelling in clay.
le plein (full-up) which took place at galerie iris clert, was inspired by yves klein\'s exhibition le vide (the void). although a direct response to klein\'s work, le plein showcased arman\'s interest in the dadaist\'s use of found and discarded objects.
 this reading seems to properly capture the violence of little hands, with its awful suggestion of a massacre of the innocents.' little hands is typical of the strategy behind arman\'s accumulations series, where he would gather identical objects together and display them in a vitrine, or glass-fronted case.
this ambitious sculpture stands 50 feet high, consisting of 60 cars encased in over 40,000 pounds of concrete. by contrast, long term parking calls attention to the failure of modern utopias.
this particular colere was made at a television studio during the making of an american documentary about french avant-garde art. when asked in an interview about his attraction to acts of violence, arman cited his fascination with the ability of war to channel sexual energy.
a studio fire, cancer operation, and emotional turmoil help explain the title of this painting executed one year before gorky\'s death. scholars (helped, as in other cases, by the study of gorky\'s drawings) have suggested the presence of images including figures - perhaps at the left the pained and suspended figure of gorky himself - in a structured interior.
in the same document, gorky also described the "sh-h-h-sh-h of silver leaves of the poplars." according to the scholar harry rand, sos or sosi is armenian for the poplar tree that creates the sound gorky describes.
 in his later work, gorky would depart from such rigidly arranged compositions in favor of a more spontaneous painting technique, yet he would always remain attentive to the structure of his paintings.' typifying his work of the mid 1930s, the completely abstract composition organization (1933-36) is an amalgamation of gorky\'s exposure to the synthetic cubist works of pablo picasso (with flat planes that are less fragmented and linear, yet more colorful), as well as the signature organic pictorial motifs of joan miro.
this early painting of 1927 is a superlative example of gorky\'s "czanne" period. this particular landscape was painted from nature on staten island, where gorky sought out a hillside reminiscent of l\'estaque, one of the beloved painting destinations of czanne.
gorky\'s early work the artist and his mother (c. 1926-36), for which he did many drawings and painted versions, is a deeply personal composition that depicts the artist as a child with his mother, who died in his arms in 1919 following the armenian genocide. however, the more immediate source for the painting is a (frequently reproduced) photograph of the young gorky with his mother taken in armenia around 1912.
in this work, artemisia gentileschi presents yet another woman who had been exoticized as a sexual temptress by her male counterparts. in this painting, gentileschi presents a complicated vision of female power and powerlessness.
the son danae bore was perseus who later fulfilled the prophecy. the greek myth of danae tells the story of a young woman confined to her bedchamber by her father, king acrisius of argos.
in this painting, gentileschi depicts another popular biblical scene (which she herself returned to more than once during her career): the slaying of holofernes by judith. traditionally portrayals had focused on the beauty and courage of judith rather than the process of the beheading itself.
in this painting, gentileschi presents lucretia, a figure from classical mythology who was raped and, after confessing what had happened, killed herself. here, gentileschi depicts the moment in which lucretia makes the decision to stab herself.
this accomplished painting is the first work known to be entirely painted by artemisia gentileschi, completed when she was 17 years old. while many artists have chosen this subject, susanna is usually presented as unaware of the elders\' presence, or even welcoming them in a flirtatious fashion.
there is a visceral, experiential aspect to viewing this work by dove, which interprets the sound of foghorns in the mist.  rather than the long and rich tradition of representational images of nature, dove has eschewed the unessential to release its spiritual aspects and place the viewer in immediate contact with natural forms, removing himself as the intermediary.'.
painted while in paris, lobster shows the influence of the french modern masters upon dove, in particular paul czanne\'s spatial arrangements, and henri matisse\'s bold, signature color.  lobster was the last representational image dove painted.'.
in reds\'s absence, dove began tracking the moon for two months in his diaries, only stopping when his wife returned. dove painted this work while his beloved wife and creative inspiration, reds, was absent for two months tending to her infirmed mother.
in the late 1920s, dove started listening to the radio while painting, especially jazz and swing.  here, the pulsating red forms, irregular and improvisational, capture the raw exuberance of jazz and swing for the viewer to sense fully.'.
few american artists prior to world war ii made collages, and dove was the most proficient artist to do so. here, dove has created a pointed commentary on the critic forbes watson of whom the artist was himself highly critical.
at the time, the relationship between posters, public advertisements, and fine art was a topic of debate, with beardsley at the forefront.  his posters, as well as his convictions about commercial design, were practical and beautiful, helping to revolutionize poster advertising.'.
in this illustration of the deathbed of pierrot the clown for the savoy magazine in london, beardsley depicts what he described as "strange hermaphroditic characters wandering about in pierrot costume." pierrot was a popular figure for so many because his identity was malleable.
originally titled abbe aubrey, the central figure appears distorted, not unlike figures in the artist\'s earlier work. the figure appears inundated by intricately rendered flora that includes a pixy or fairy at top left.
in poe\'s the black cat (1893) a cat, having been cruelly mistreated by its owner, the narrator, retaliates by biting him. a quintessential example of beardsley\'s early style, the black cat consists of large swaths of black and white areas delineated by basic outlines and almost entirely void of decorative details.
in many of his illustrations for salom, beardsley challenges victorian concepts of sexuality and gender roles. contrary to the victorian notion of the passive and subordinate female, here beardsley depicts salom as self-possessed, sexually charged, and, most appallingly, dominant.
inspired by the murderous biblical femme fatale who killed john the baptist, wilde\'s salom was condemned as blasphemous. in true symbolist form, beardsley created illustrations that addressed key social issues beyond wilde\'s book.
on islandia\'s head sits a crown of roses, repeated in the peaceful floral offering in her outstretched hand. we see that her right hand is triumphantly raised, while her left is outstretched, and her right leg, bent in contrapposto, gives islandia a classical, strident quality.
john and jackie kennedy are seen here leaving dallas airport on november 22, 1963, just moments before his assassination. audrey flack\'s kennedy motorcade ranks as an innovative example of a photorealist style that invites the spectator to reflect on the very ontology of art.
in flack\'s still-life, marilyn monroe is remembered in what could be a shop-window memorial. given the faded monochrome photographs, the melting candle, the draining hourglass and the over-ripened fruit, flack\'s marilyn possess a symbolic lament to the waning of memory and very possibly the loss of innocence.
in another of her vanitas, flack addresses the connected questions of memory, the holocaust and the friability of human life. bourke-white\'s image forms the backdrop for a selection of juxtapositions featuring ephemeral and permanent emblems, while the text, at the bottom of the frame, is reproduced from jewish religious teachings.
boxers is a portrait borne of humanism and good-humour. commenting of sander\'s portraits in her seminal book \'on photography\', susan sontag confirmed indeed that sander "chose individuals for their representative characters, and that [sander had] assumed, correctly, that the camera cannot help but reveal faces as social masks".
in 1929 sander published faces of our time, a book of 60 portraits one of which was bricklayer. as with the young farmers, for instance, the unnamed bricklayer engages directly with sander\'s camera, though here his whole body is facing us.
sander took a series of photographs at barum\'s american caravan menagerie as part of his circus workers series. typically for a sander portrait the relaxed subjects look directly into the photographer\'s lens.
 young farmers were now within easy reach of \'aspirational advertising campaigns\' and \'travelling salesmen\' thus allowing them to \'emulate the higher quality attire of the bourgeois urban class\'.' in the image, three suited young men are seen walking along a rural path, probably on their way to a dance.
rodin received the commission to memorialize the great french novelist and poet in 1891. however, as with so many of rodin\'s commissions, the work dragged on and on while rodin struggled to settle on a composition.
 today, however, it remains well-loved as an emblem of civic sacrifice, with one version standing outside the houses of parliament in london.' the figures are arranged all on one level, rejecting the "pyramid" composition typical of figure groups at the time.
rodin labored on this mammoth project for over twenty years. it was a deliberate attempt to rival lorenzo ghiberti\'s famous bronze doors for the baptistery of florence cathedral, the gates of paradise (1425-52), the competition for which is often said to have initiated the renaissance.
critics gave this sculpture the title the kiss, but rodin originally called it paolo and francesca, after the story in dante\'s divine comedy about a young noblewoman who falls in love with her husband\'s brother.  over 300 bronze copies of the kiss had been produced by rodin\'s death in 1917.'.
over fifty casts were made of this sculpture, which are today scattered throughout the world, making it one of rodin\'s most famous works.  rodin also chose the thinker as his tombstone.'.
balthus\'s early paintings were often studies of his neighbor therese blanchard, a young girl either featured alone or with her cat. the cat on the other hand, looks off to the distance, hinting perhaps at another presence in the room.
as new yorker magazine art critic peter schjeldahl writes: "balthus sticks us with a moral conundrum, because he can. while the title quite literally can refer to the guitar in the foreground of the composition, he is using it in a more symbolic way - the sitting woman has her arms and hands positioned as though playing a guitar; here, though, the guitar is the body of a young girl.
this portrait of pierre matisse, son of the painter henri matisse, who ran a successful gallery in new york city, points to both the personal and business relationship the two men enjoyed with one another. true to his style, he represents matisse in a traditional oil portrait, but with small interventions to impart a larger meaning to his subject.
while the woman in the foreground is ostensibly asleep, she has her cane draped over herself, hinting at either injury or a need for protection while she rests. the rolling hill in the foreground has a soft mound of flora at its peak, and behind it jagged mountains meet in soft, split valleys.
he updates this depiction of shared - or parallel -- sociality by combining the enigmatic affects, stiff postures and heightened atmosphere of surrealism with a classical composing of figures in architectural space.  he offers a more refined take on some of the ambiguous portraiture than his german contemporary otto dix produced around this same time, or the group tableaus in modern spaces that max beckmann was also rendering.'.
overlapping the title\'s indication of dreaming, her facial expressions suggest the mixture of possible ecstatic pleasure and an uncertain, uncomfortable or even pained response to unwanted shared sensual experience. this work was created the year after girl and cat, and towards the end of the period during which he painted therese.
with site-specific works like hammer boy, banksy and other street artists encourage viewers to envision urban spaces, surfaces, and objects differently, and to see fun and whimsy in otherwise mundane spaces. in this way, street artists have much the same mentality as skateboarders or people who practice parkour.
before its creation, one of banksy\'s associates approached the pub owner on his behalf to seek permission for the work. the pub owner says, "my first thought was, \'oh no\'.
in this work, banksy plays upon one of the world\'s most famous paintings, the mona lisa (1503-4). while da vinci\'s mona lisa appears graceful and passive, banksy gives her a powerful, confrontational, and active sensibility.
the condemning of street art as illegal vandalism, and its frequent removal, has been the focus of many other works by banksy.  banksy biographer will ellsworth-jones wrote in 2013 that banksy "is an artist who has got people running around the city desperate to see his work before it gets painted over."'.
with this work, banksy is drawing a parallel between the ancient, prehistoric cave paintings, and modern-day graffiti / street art. this mural was created in may 2008 on leake street, london, as part of the cans festival.
by substituting a weapon with a bunch of flowers, banksy is advocating peace instead of war, and he opted to install this message of peace in a high-conflict area. the work also carries the message that peace comes with active hard work.
banksy has replicated monet\'s original painting almost exactly, using the same materials as monet, however banksy has added two discarded shopping carts and a traffic cone to the pond. this work by banksy refigures the iconic impressionist painting bridge over a pond of water lillies (1899) by claude monet.
hepworth saw something pure and classical in the process of surgery. although hepworth is known primarily for her sculptural work, she was also skilled at draftsmanship and produced many sketches, drawings and mixed media works over the course of her career.
after her son paul was killed in a royal air force plane crash over thailand in 1953, hepworth\'s work was significantly interrupted. corinthos is arguably hepworth\'s masterpiece in terms of her interest in the interaction between interior and exterior forms.
the eye can trace the intertwining curvilinear spirals endlessly through their moebius strip flow in this sculpture. a later work in her ouevre, her use of the humble material of plaster here was actually among her earliest resources for sculpting.
hepworth made several mother and child sculptures in 1934, when she was pregnant with ben nicholson\'s child (it actually turned out that she had triplets). hepworth\'s contemporary and friend henry moore was also making mother and child pieces at this time, but while moore\'s composition tended to be made as single form, hepworth saw her mother and child as separate, but intimately involved, entities.
it remains an important work nonetheless. for the first time, hepworth\'s work is concerned with a manifestation of absence rather than presence.
squares with two circles is one of barbara hepworth\'s most significant later works. many of her works, including squares with two circles, are intended to be situated outside.
this all black-and-white multi-media installation was the inaugural show at deitch projects\' wooster street space in new york city. after entering the gallery, the viewer encountered images and words projected onto the floors and walls, changing every eight seconds in intervals of twelve.
for this early work kruger appropriated a portion of michelangelo\'s renowned sistine chapel ceiling fresco notably the image of god\'s hand touching adam\'s at the moment of creation. through her use of the pronoun "you," kruger directly addresses the viewer, inviting them to impose their own narrative on michelangelo\'s masterpiece.
the message unequivocally addresses the issue of the continued feminist struggle, connecting the physical body of female viewers to the contemporary conditions that necessitate the feminist protest.  kruger\'s slick graphic aesthetic and use of dramatic found imagery also place this work within the purview of postmodernism, tying it not only to contemporary critique, but to the larger social and cultural responses within the period.'.
newman made several sculptures, but broken obelisk is his most monumental. several versions of broken obelisk exist, with one in houston, dedicated to the memory of dr.
les sourciers is typical of the work of the french surrealist yves tanguy, who often used biomorphic forms to evoke dream images.  newman disliked the surrealists\' delving into personal worlds, and he was anxious to insist that abstract painting was not similarly introverted; newman believed his art was a quasi-religious endeavor filled with universal symbols.'.
newman saw onement i as a breakthrough in his work. it features the first full incarnation of what he later called a "zip," a vertical band of color.
the wild is unique in newman\'s oeuvre by virtue of its unusual size; at eight feet tall by one and a half inches wide, it focuses on the zip alone. it demonstrated newman\'s belief that a painting need not be physically large to inspire an intense response from the viewer.
third station is part of newman\'s major fourteen-piece series, the stations of the cross: lema sabachthani (1958-66). the title refers to christ\'s cry on the cross, yet he also intended to evoke the cries of humanity throughout history.
with this suggestively titled readymade, the baroness offers a critique of the capitalist society that worshipped the god of commerce over all else. replacing the sleek lines and materials with jagged wood, cathedral offers an organic riposte to the rationalism of the steel and glass skyscrapers that were beginning to rise around the city.
unlike rembrandt, soutine isolated the subject and employed an unusual method in the creation of this still life. here, soutine cunningly portrayed the beef split open, as if bearing its soul to the viewer.
despite the artist\'s abundance of landscape work throughout his career, soutine did not have a terribly affectionate relationship with the outdoors. although quite taken with cubism and its intellectual pursuits, soutine refrained from experimenting with the style in his own art.
pastry cook with red handkerchief (aka the little pastry cook) is perhaps the best known of soutine\'s pastry cook paintings which caught the attention of albert barnes in 1923. the angular, exaggerated features of the young man and his absent gaze echo those found in some of soutine\'s self-portraits, suggesting that soutine saw himself in this young man.
there is unmistakable symbolism in many, if not all, of soutine\'s still-life paintings of food. not only does food play an important role in religious ritual, but soutine also endured great poverty while growing up and constant stomach ulcers that often made eating impossible.
in soutine\'s version, he confronts his figure head-on, with little distinction between the woman and the water itself. this portrait is another example in which soutine reinterpreted rembrandt - specifically the old master\'s hendrickje bathing from 1655.
during his regular visits to new york, demuth would meet with friends at jazz clubs, basement bars, and hotel cafs. this sketchy, impressionistic watercolor depicts an evening he spent listening to jazz in the bar of the marshall hotel in the company of fellow artists marcel duchamp, edward fisk, and marsden hartley.
this amusing watercolor depicts a small crowd: a woman in a bold, low-cut dress on the right, two men at the center, and a man and woman at the right. demuth humorously accentuates the phallic form of brancusi\'s bronze sculpture, which caused quite a scandal on its debut.
critics tend to believe that the title incense of a new church holds self-evident meaning - the plumes of industrial smoke reminiscent of incense, the factories replacing the churches that once dominated the american cultural landscape. this painting is a masterpiece of precisionism, projecting form and structure onto organic and ambiguous phenomena, showing the influence of cubism.
this enigmatic painting, one of seven in demuth\'s final major series, depicts a concrete and steel grain elevator in lancaster, pennsylvania. at the same time, the painting may also allude to the slave labor that built the great monuments to the pharaohs.
just as demuth\'s precisionist style brings out an organic character in industrial imagery, it teases the music of industrial geometry out of the organic.  demuth\'s flower paintings brought him commercial and critical success during his lifetime, but they receive relatively little critical attention today and unlike his well-known contemporary georgia o\'keefe, he did not become famous for them.'.
demuth painted this self-portrait while he was studying at the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts (pama). 23 years old, he depicts himself as a pensive, thoughtful young man. this early self-portrait is somewhat reminiscent of the work of john singer sargent, though demuth would go on to develop his own distinct style.
like traditional american landscape painting, sheeler organized the painting around a body of water, yet even the water has been subject to human ingenuity and technological might, as it is contained in a canal. this image, a painting based on one of sheeler\'s photographs of the ford river rouge plant, canal with salvage ship (1927), best captures sheeler\'s redefinition of the american pastoral and the traditional subjects of landscape painting.
in an era that placed increasing emphasis on technology and mass production, the kinds of objects sheeler focuses on here were powerfully nostalgic reminders of an ostensibly simpler time.  sheeler\'s collection was another expression of his national pride, and a tribute on a much smaller scale to the same american craftsmanship which could create majestic skyscrapers and factory complexes.'.
this early photograph depicts the squat, solid stove at the center of the living room in the home sheeler shared with his best friend, morton schamberg, in doylestown, pennsylvania. stieglitz proclaimed sheeler, along with morton schamberg and paul strand, the "trinity of photography.".
after finishing a commercial photography assignment at the plant, sheeler produced a series of paintings of the factory complex. for sheeler and many of his contemporaries, american factories were the 20th-century equivalent of wonderous cathedrals of europe.
sheeler moved to new york in 1919, following the death of his close friend, morton schamberg. his interest in the city\'s urban landscape was heightened by his collaboration with the photographer paul strand on the 1920 short film, manhatta, which emphasized the abstract qualities of the island\'s rapidly changing urban landscape.
in the painting, as in the photograph, sheeler is depicted turning his 1917 photograph the stove into the 1932 crayon drawing interior with stove. the image sheeler included of himself in the lower right of the painting is a rendition of his 1932 photograph self-portrait at easel.
in 1923, sheeler reviewed an exhibition of alfred stieglitz\'s photographs, criticizing his former mentor\'s use of platinum paper. though realistically conceived, the photo reveals the underlying abstract structures of this feat of engineering; the image is simultaneously abstract and highly realistic.
a back road most significantly reveals the influence of the barbizon school painters on hassam. in hassam\'s painting, the sense of stillness and the heat of summer are coupled with an acknowledgment of the vastness of nature that dwarfs the human scale.
like many of his other works, the flag series, including allies day, derives from several french models of public flag displays on festival days, such as monet\'s rue montorgeuil, fte de 30 juin 1878 (1878). he painted them both to raise money for the war effort and to instill a sense of patriotism and solidarity among americans.
its importance is revealed by hassam\'s ability here to immediately synthesize the artistic developments then taking place in paris. this painting depicts a busy tree-lined street in paris filled with horse-drawn carriages traveling in both directions, one of two identically-titled canvases capturing the parades that occurred in paris to mark the beginning of the annual horse racing season.
poppies, isles of shoals is characteristic of the many landscapes that hassam painted when on vacation from new york - from the 1890s onwards. it was there that he formed a friendship with the poet and critic celia thaxter, whose gardens, along with the nearby shores and ocean, greatly intrigued hassam.
winter in union square encapsulates hassam\'s mature style of cityscapes after he returned to america from europe in 1889. hassam became famous for his many depictions of this hub of human activity in the winter, when the inclement weather often created fascinating effects of light and texture.
after 45 hours, one of the museum staff members interfered by placing a pitcher of water next to burden as concerns started to arise about his health. in this piece, the artist put his life in the hands of the audience and museum staff.
this kinetic sculpture by burden represents what he thinks cities will start to look like in the not-too-distant future, and was inspired by the 1927 science-fiction film metropolis by fritz lang. the artist has moved from shocking us into action to appealing to our sense of reason using the visual evidence of his art.
in describing the piece, burden stated that "it was really disgusting, and there was a smoking hole in my arm." shoot is the piece for which burden is infamously known.
the action of the poetically and ironically titled through the night softly consisted of burden slithering across broken glass in his underwear with his hands bound behind his back. this raw performance put the audience in discomfort by having to view the pain felt by burden as shards of glass shredded the bloodied front of his body.
trans-fixed involved the literal transfixion of burden to a volkswagen via nails through the palms of his hands. however, burden reminded the audience of the reality of pain that we so often dismiss or do not even notice.
a lot of black art that came before was set up to critique the system. "it was like revisiting the idea of black power in the seventies, but through a more celebratory lens - not fighting for power but celebrating a newfound power.
tradition dictates that these blue \'devils\' have permission to behave in a menacing and intrusive manner that would normally be prohibited by society. iscariot blues shows two figures playing musical instruments while a third hangs from a gibbet under the cover of darkness.
this life-size painting shows an abstracted black virgin mary with a vibrant yellow background. he said: "when i go to the national gallery and see paintings of the virgin mary, i see how sexually charged they are.
the upper room installation of 13 paintings is an explosive rendering of the sacred and secular in the context of human and non-human worlds. the title also references this bible story; the upper room is where jesus\' last supper before crucifixion was held, alongside 12 apostles.
from the vantage point of the skyscrapers overlooking the park, the gates had the distinct visual effect of looking like an orange river, snaking through central park. to some viewers inside the park, however, the gates did not accentuate the park experience, but stood out like a sore thumb.
valley curtain was a tremendous feat of engineering and coordination that experienced significant and expensive setbacks. in the spring of 1970 christo and jeanne-claude began work on valley , a 200,200 square foot section of orange, woven nylon fabric that stretched across an entire colorado valley.
oil barrels became an important medium for christo in 1958. particularly in wall of oil barrels, the artists expanded the scope and scale of the previous works, creating a larger and more impenetrable wall of both wrapped and unwrapped barrels that blockaded a section of a city street.
using one million square feet of erosion-control synthetic fabric, 35 miles of polypropylene rope, 25,000 fasteners, threaded studs, and clips, jeanne-claude and christo wrapped 1.5 miles of rocky coast off little bay in sydney, australia to create wrapped coast in the late 1960s. the draping of the fabric over the coast helped to re-contextualize and de-familiarize a well-known natural setting, and revealed the essential form and shape of the coast as a discrete object in and of itself.
 in wrapped reichstag, the artists nodded to this tradition by draping fabric over form, but revised it in a modern, charged, political statement.' this work used 1,076,390 square feet of thick, shiny, aluminum-based polypropylene fabric and 9.7 miles of blue polypropylene rope to wrap the reichstag in germany.
in this group of paintings, commonly known as his \'gray works\', wool further reworks the silkscreens in a complex creative process. the work is a large-scale abstraction, with complex layers of lines and washes of paint.
this work is a decorative black pattern, made with incised rollers on a painted aluminum white background. the work also possesses an inherent "humour of their absurd efficiency", as claimed by art critic peter schjeldahl.
here, \'run dog run dog run\' echoes a nursery rhyme or folktale limerick, suggesting again a connection between art forms. the painting is a large white aluminum plate painted with black letters that, once decoded, read \'run dog run dog run\'.
this work also seems to recapture elements of abstract expressionism, prompting writer cornelius tittel to ask whether wool recognizes the irony that by including expressionist gestures in his work wool continues its legacy. it demonstrates wool\'s use of silkscreen techniques which he began using as a primary tool from the early 1990s.
it was created in collaboration with the artist josh smith, with who wool has been collaborating for many years. it is the unique collaborative process, one that promotes a \'silent\' artistic dialogue, that heightens the significance of this work.
this work consists of out of focus words, layered atop each other in the center of the page. upon closer attention, the words are revealed to read \'impatient\' and \'impotent\'.
prince adds that wool has always had the ability to "convert this formalism into a statement of loss, the loss of meaning". the work is a bronze sculpture, composed of a contorted wire that seems to define a random yet organic shape.
in recent years, close has extended his investigations into various media to the ancient genre of tapestry, the repetitive and episodic weaving process in many ways paralleling his own painstaking juxtaposition of various colors in much of his portraiture. using computerized photo transfers of glass daguerreotypes (for black-and-white versions) or polaroid snapshots, the tapestry medium is ideally suited for close\'s interest in large-scale work that nonetheless depends on pinpoint-like precision.
the tentative air of experimentation that might be said to characterize big nude is nowhere apparent in big self-portrait, a watershed painting that virtually showcases close\'s unique method. abandoning the full-body view, close turned to one of the oldest traditions anywhere in art history, the self-portrait.
close\'s enjoyment of the physical interaction between artist and material gave him a particular affinity for working in the fingerprint method.  the numerous, individual touches of oil pigment gradually creating the appearance of supple flesh lends to the painting a sense of intimacy so appropriate to the underlying relationship between artist and his chosen subject.'.
the mezzotint printmaking process yields a soft, light-infused surface, here seen to best effect in closes\'s rendering of the sitter\'s hair. the large format of keith, although not nearly as large as close\'s earlier portrait paintings, did not translate well to the outdated mezzotint process.
for kent, close made use of preparatory drawings for the first time to explore the three-color process, an imitation, or re-employment, of the photographic dye-transfer method.  in order to facilitate the process, close wore cellophane filters over his eyeglasses in order to view marks in one color at a time.'.
sherman poses as a sad, or pathetic clown for some of her more recent works. set up much like a glamour shot, this photo focuses on the clown\'s face as the strange character stares stoically at the audience.
in one of her most recent untitled series, sherman explores the role of the suburban american housewife, or middle-american "everywoman," a character at once sympathetic, pathetic, and often too close to recognition for comfort.  never fully defining where she stands in relation to such images, sherman leaves interpretation open to the individual viewer, something that ultimately says more about the person reading these images than the subjects portrayed in their glossy, mirror-like surfaces.'.
here, sherman takes on the role of the small-town girl just happening upon the big city.  she is, typically, at first suspicious of the metropolitan lights and shadows, only to be eventually seduced by its undeniable attractions.'.
 profoundly democratic in its overarching message, like the best of oldenburg\'s work, clothespin is no mere pop witticism, but a celebration of the role of design in everyday life.' without presupposing a specific level of education or familiarity with the history of art or sculpture, clothespin asks us to consider the manner in which small innovations in design transform the way we live.
floor cone, floor burger, and floor cake (shown here) were among the monumental structures based on comfort food fashioned by the artist in the early 1960s. oldenburg introduced sculpture to pop art, beginning with a series inspired by duchamp\'s "readymades" and the bluntly prosaic subjects chosen by pop artists like warhol and lichtenstein.
paint torch, an inverted paint brush erected outside the pennsylvania academy of fine arts in 2011, epitomizes oldenburg\'s life-long approach to democratic, site-specific, accessible subject matter multi-layered in its symbolism. the paintbrush-as-torch motif evokes the most patriotic of figures, the statue of liberty.
a plate of frosted cookies, two sundaes, a cake, an oversized rack of ribs, and a half-eaten caramel apple vie for our attention inside a display case. roughly to scale, these unappetizing models of classic american diner fare reach out to us, rather like embarrassing relatives.
by placing a toilet on a pedestal, soft toilet is an obvious homage to marcel duchamp\'s fountain (an upturned urinal presented as art in 1917). soft toilet slumps forward, as if it may spill its contents into the room.
stake hitch, an arrestingly powerful form that consisted of a bright red aluminum stake and illusionistic rope, transformed the viewer\'s experience of the soaring vault in an optical illusion - the rope appeared to anchor the ceiling to the floor. stake hitch, a sculpture commissioned for a large exhibition vault within the dallas museum of art, highlights the manner in which oldenburg continued to challenge the perspective of the viewer and even some of the institutions that have commissioned his work.
 both the book format and the photomontage technique have the ability to successfully bring together what are otherwise quite disparate elements of scattered mind and a fragmented career.' this is the first illustration found in cahun\'s autobiographical text aveux non avenus (translated as "disavowals").
the artist\'s head is strikingly and disconcertedly disembodied, suggesting an imbalance, as though the head is disproportionately heavy and the body somehow redundant. although in bed, cahun is not sleepy, convalescing, or sexually available as may be expected/accepted for a woman in 1914.
in this striking photograph, the artist has further transitioned from her childhood/teenage identity of lucy schwob to the gender-neutral persona of claude cahun. cahun embraces this metaphor and seems to touch upon contemporary theoretical discussions that associate masks with one\'s daily acceptance/rejection of identity and gender performances.
 for in becoming so involved with nature, cahun and woodman enter into an ongoing dialogue with death as well as with life.' for here, cahun and woodman display a typical, stereotypical, and feminine \'knowing\' due to their intuitive connection with the earth.
in spite of its nominally realistic subject, harbor scene at sunset is a pure work of the imagination. claude\'s harbor paintings are also unique in their pioneering use of sunlight as the only depicted source of illumination.
the palace of the roman god of love cupid occupies the central position in this painting. in the foreground, cupid\'s lover psyche is shown brooding pensively, deer grazing on the grassy shoreline behind her; the melancholic atmosphere is enhanced by the depiction of hazy and misty light, and the green-blue color-palette.
the inside cover of claude lorrain\'s liber veritatis - "book of truth" - contains a small self-portrait. in any case, claude left the liber veritatis book to his adopted - possibly biological - daughter, agnese upon his death.
the effects of this painstaking labor are evident in works such as pastoral landscape, which is amongst those which have earned claude his unparalleled position in art history. we experience suction into the remote distance in terms of space and time - the time a traveler requires to cover the distance.
this painting also gives a good indication of the use and significance of architectural ruins in claude\'s work. after the downfall of troy - as recounted in homer\'s iliad - the trojan hero aeneas wanders for six years, before arriving in carthage, where he meets and falls in love with queen dido.
boulevard des capucines captures a scene of the hustle and bustle of parisian life from the studio of monet\'s friend, the photographer felix nadar.  the first impressionist exhibition was held in nadar\'s studio, and rather appropriately, monet included this piece in the show.'.
historians and scientists believe that monet happened upon discoveries in vision and optics.  as in this example, monet seems to have come upon several particularities of vision, and painterly effects, that were not properly proved by science for many years after his death.'.
painted on the embankment in london, monet\'s westminster bridge is one of the finest examples of his work during the time he and his family were in wartime refuge. this simple, asymmetrical composition is balanced by the horizontal bridge, the boats floating upon the waves with the vertical wharf and ladder in the foreground.
one of monet\'s most popular figure paintings, lady with a parasol showcases the women\'s accessory.  but monet is interested in light itself, and captures it in the scene in an unmatched way.'.
women in the garden was painted at ville d\'avray using his future wife camille as the only model.  in january 1867, his friend and fellow impressionist frederic bazille purchased the work for the sum of 2,500 francs in order to help monet out of the extreme debt that monet was suffering from at the time.'.
still began to move towards more vertically oriented canvases in the mid-1950s, a shift that is evident in 1957-d. in this work, the fleeting flashes of color that interrupted the dark expanses of earlier paintings are now monumentally scaled vertical forms that rise and fall across an almost mural-like composition.  art historian david anfam has observed how still was drawn to compositions which evoke "enclosure and liberation, containment and precarious release;" here the dramatic tension of yellow and black suggests exactly that contrast.'.
this work is a late-period piece typical of still\'s output after his 1961 move to rural maryland. it features a markedly lighter color palette than his earlier paintings, though it retains the sense of a loose, grid-like structure underlying the abstract motifs, a characteristic evident in some of this earlier work.
an amalgam of body and landscape, untitled is emblematic of the influence of surrealism on still\'s work of the mid-1930s. it also shows the development of a personal iconography and hints at the artist\'s lifelong interests in mythology, native american shamanism, and totemic motifs.
untitled (indian houses, nespelem) is characteristic of the artist\'s work from the late 1920s to mid-1930s. it was executed in the town of nespelem, on the coleville indian reservation, where still co-founded an artist\'s colony in 1937.
seated figure won marca-relli the prestigious logan medal of the art institute of chicago in 1954.  in these works, marca-relli sought to explore abstract form using "the architecture of the human figure" as a starting point for interchanges between light and dark, positive and negative space.'.
in the late 1950s, marca-relli embarked on a series of works that were ambitious in their scale, complexity and color harmonies. with surge, marca-relli abandoned his formerly subdued palette of off-white and ochre to introduce bold zones of color as a new formal element in his paintings.
the interlocking biomorphic forms in trial represent the increasing complexity of marca-relli\'s collage technique during the 1950s. the artist has deliberately obliterated any recognizable sections of human anatomy, yet the work suggests a myriad of jostling figures.
this untitled painting from 1940 reveals the influence of giorgio di chirico on marca-relli\'s early career as a painter. this strangely unpopulated square is strongly evocative of di chirico\'s enigmatic imagery inspired by the architecture and melencholy atmosphere of turin.
with respect to the former, parker has commented: "the brass band is part of a robustness we used to have ... breathless is a sculptural installation made of 54 brass band instruments - 4 tubas, 2 euphoniums, 14 horns, 2 flugel horns, 8 trombones and 24 cornets, compressed and suspended from wires.
as such, they have been compared to "shrines" to turner\'s works. this is one of several pieces by parker comprising canvas liners and tacking edges removed by conservators at tate from turner\'s paintings, due to their deteriorating condition.
transitional object (psychobarn) was commissioned for the rooftop of the metropolitan museum of art in new york. parker created the installation with the assistance of the company specialising in stage sets.
for this nine-part series, twombly took inspiration from commodus, emperor of the roman empire and son of marcus aurelius, who was later assassinated. yet, these works also have a structured composition, and each is based around a grid form, perhaps summoning ideas of the imposed order of the roman empire.
the title refers to the roman myth in which jupiter, transformed into a swan, seduces leda, who would later give birth to helen of troy. as in much of his work, twombly transformed an ancient myth by becoming jupiter himself: ravaging the canvas and producing beauty.
while in the army, twombly modified the surrealist technique of automatic drawing by creating compositions in the dark - after lights out. these "blind" drawings resulted in the kind of elongated, distorted forms and curves that we see in this work.
for this work, twombly\'s composition has taken inspiration and form from ideas of handwriting or mark-making. yet although his continuous loops and scrawls were inspired, in part, by handwriting drills, twombly\'s repetitive, rhythmic drawing does not create specific words.
like the chrysanthemum, it is an ancient symbol of aesthetic contemplation commonly associated with japanese art. in this work, from a series of peony paintings, each on six connected panels, twombly turned to bursts of vibrant, expressive color and recognizable imagery.
since 1988, hirst has been generating so-called "spot paintings", also known as the pharmaceutical paintings. while the artist painted the earliest ones, later spot paintings continue to be produced by assistants under his direction, sparking questions about value.
this sculpture consists of an 18th-century human skull recreated in platinum and encrusted with 8,000 diamonds.  hirst\'s brilliance as an artist is inseparable from the publicity surrounding his work; this is literally part of the art.'.
the artist glued pupa onto white canvases, where they hatched into butterflies, fed on bowls of fruit, mated, and subsequently died. hirst\'s first solo exhibition, held in london in 1991, built upon his established reputation for using live animals in his work.
when seen from the side, the dissection is invisible and the mother and child seem to ascend side-by-side in profile. the white wood frames on each tank evoke the pure, clean lines of classic minimalist sculpture.
first on display at the cohen gallery in 1992 and now permanently on view the tate modern, this installation is a detailed replica of a pharmacy. according to the artist, this work was inspired by walking into a pharmacy and marveling at its ability "to provoke an idea of confidence.".
the artist, with a huge grin on his face, poses next to a severed head in a morgue. hirst selected the photograph and enlarged it in 1991 for one of his early solo shows, though it had been taken several years earlier.
this series of drawings was inspired by joyce\'s chamber music, which the writer irreverently describes as being inspired by the sound of urination into a chamber pot. some of flavin\'s earliest dedicated works, such as apollinaire wounded, cite famous literary figures.
the criss-crossing framework of greens crossing greens approximates mondrian\'s paintings, which in turn evoke stained glass windows, one of the oldest forms of lighting design. one of flavin\'s so-called "barriers," greens crossing greens blocks off the gallery space with two intersecting, fence-like constructions.
flavin\'s iconic diagonal grew out of a sketch of the "diagonal of personal ecstasy," apparently made earlier on the same day. with the "ecstatic" revelation of the diagonal, flavin realized the potential of the fluorescent bulb as a basic form that could be built upon and infinitely repeated, not unlike the grooved design of brancusi\'s endless column.
daniel buren\'s affichages sauvages (savage/wild posterings) is a series of temporary works created by the artist in paris 1968 and 1969. he then posted them in public places, often over existing billboards or other fly-posted advertisements, or on public buildings.
the work is a key example of buren intervening in spaces designed and created by others, and creating dialogues with other creative practitioners and histories. in an interview, buren compared the setting to his important work at palais royal: "it\'s like the palais royale, an eighteenth century building.
to create this work, buren took a found standard piece of striped awning canvas (that also features his 8.7cm-wide stripes), and painted the outermost white stripes with white paint. as art historian guy lelong further argues, "as soon as its outer stripes are painted over, the striped fabric necessarily evokes painting since it is directly confronted with it.
buren felt that lloyd wright\'s ascending design promoted a hierarchical \'top down\' approach to the art on view, and his proposal was intended to challenge this relationship. in 1971, buren was asked to take part in an exhibition at the guggenheim, which invited artists to produce work in response to the building\'s unusual architecture, focusing on the central spiral designed by frank lloyd wright.
to his left, a group of workers mourn the loss of a companion, killed by a machine. on the other side of the wall, a group of workers and intellectuals similarly march united towards freedom.
this is the central panel of a triptych, along with panels commemorating the victims of war and victims of fascism. this straightforward mural was not well received; critics deemed it too simplistic and banal, as if siqueiros had reduced art to mere advertising.
in relying on these abstract notations of the elements, siqueiros creates a timeless depiction of mother nature and her realm. on the ceiling over the staircase in the small courtyard of the national preparatory school, siqueiros depicted a monumental winged female surrounded by representations of the four elements.
designed as a political and cultural center, the polyforum cultural siqueiros includes several exhibition spaces, most notably the forum universal which houses the interior section of this mural. standing on a rotating platform and listening to siqueiros\'s narration, the viewer witnesses the march of humanity unfold around him.
hockney began photographing the grand canyon in 1982, aiming "to photograph the unphotographable. which is to say, space. [t]here is no question that the thrill of standing on that rim of the grand canyon is spatial.
in order to create the painting, hockney spent three weeks digitally cleaning the painting by claude on his computer. created relatively late in hockney\'s career, a bigger message is a culmination of a series of works by hockney inspired by the sermon on the mount, claude lorrain\'s 1656 painting.
a bigger splash was created as the final result of two smaller paintings in which he developed his ideas, a little splash (1966) and the splash (1966). in a bigger splash, hockney explores how to represent the constantly moving surface of the water.
the composition measures 6 x 20 feet, a scale normally reserved for grand subjects from history or the bible. for this work, he extends the cubist visual vocabulary through his use of a rich color palette borrowed from the pop art movement.
this early work by hockney shows no sign of the slick landscapes or carefully observed characters that he would later develop. this unintended double meaning delighted hockney, who had a crush on the british pop singer, cliff richard.
 the painting\'s two vanishing points lead outward toward us, creating a kind of double vision that heightens the kaleidoscopic, hallucinatory effect of the piece.' this means that the visual plane contains two vanishing points, rebuking the one-point perspective that has characterized western art since the renaissance.
the man looks over his shoulder at a woman, who looks away, a stern expression on her face. this painting showcases salle\'s desire to present various images that come together to inspire multiple readings.
the right side of the canvas shows a domestic scene turned on its side, reminiscent of a midcentury advertisement for furniture. as with many of salle\'s earlier paintings, the image of the room is partially covered by the collage-like application of additional images.
 perhaps his exploration of societal objectification has come full circle to portray a more cohesive view of the female experience.' it is not clear if all three of these images depict the same woman.
although constructed within filmstrip-like boxes that hint at an overall performance, there is no clear evidence of a "story." in this piece, salle combines an eclectic mix of found images from a variety of sources, painted in his own hand, though nevertheless reminiscent of a collage.
with the silver paintings series, salle evolves the painted collage-like compositions for which he is best known, by means of a more direct incorporation of photographic images.  produced through a process akin to silk-screening, the combination of the two images produces a painterly, imperfect effect by means of a mechanized process.'.
in tennyson, we find the early onset of salle\'s exploration into the female body as a provocative source of both guilt and glee within our communal psyche. a sensual nude lays on a sienna-colored plain reminiscent of a sun soaked beach, her back coyly turned toward the viewer.
composed entirely of geometric rectilinear and spherical shapes, smith\'s cubi series (1963-65) exhibits perhaps the artist\'s most obvious reference to cubism in his work. his singular style is apparent in the dynamism created by balancing objects precariously and playfully in a three-dimensional yet strangely flattened space.
smith titled the early and relatively small-scale sculpture helmholtzian landscape in reference to a 19th-century german scientist who studied perception. here, smith draws on cubist and surrealist painting, translating these precedents - replete with color - into three dimensions, to create a tableau that suggests a figure standing amid foliage.
hudson river landscape offers an abstract representation of the area around smith\'s bolton landing home. it can be read as translating the expressive, gestural style and automatist principles of abstract expressionist painting into sculptural form.
as the critic rosalind krauss has argued, the totem, and the idea of totemism, was an important symbol for smith. tanktotem i is the first piece in smith\'s eponymous series of welded-steel sculptures that he worked on from 1952 until 1960.
two cuts by wojnarowicz exist (a six and thirteen-minute edit), along with several other repurposings of the same footage. the footage includes images from wonarowicz\'s 1986 trip to mexico, in which scenes of violence are juxtaposed with puppets, tarot cards, toys and other ephemera.
in arthur rimbaud in new york, the artist photographed several friends wearing a mask of the french symbolist poet arthur rimbaud in locations around the city. the anachronism of the series (late 19th century rimbaud in late 1970s new york) hints at wojnarowicz\'s dark sense of humor.
by tearing maps, for example, wojnarowicz attempted to "erase borders; borders create ownership and wars." many of the elements in this work (volcanos, maps, devils and hearts) recur in wojnarowicz\'s work.
gagging cow at pier was painted at the ward line pier, an abandoned industrial building on the hudson river. gagging cow at pier is a cartoonish painting of a cow, completed early in wojnarowicz\'s career.
untitled (one day this kid...) is a work in which wojnarowicz\'s writings and visual art work appear alongside each other. untitled (one day this kid...) is also a reminder to people indifferent to the suffering of those affected by the aids epidemic that victims were children, like anyone else.
wojnarowicz later wrote on the envelope containing the contact sheets "23 photos of peter, 23 genes in a chromosome, room 1423." one of wojnarowicz\'s most painfully raw works, untitled (peter hujar) portrays the artist\'s friend and mentor immediately after his death.
photographing movie theaters and audiences kicked-off arbus\'s initial fascination with photography. she gave up shooting movie theaters when she changed from her 35mm camera to a more professional, albeit bulkier, medium format camera.
the husband tries blocking the sun and possibly arbus\'s camera from his sights. once photographing the wealthy family at their home in the new york suburbs, arbus spent almost eight hours shooting the family.
the photo is a continued dialog of a sequence of contact sheets labeled "catherine bruce" and simultaneously "bruce catherine" conveying a binary identity. this photograph is an excellent example of how arbus could personify both type and individual identity in the same body.
she categorized child with a toy hand grenade in central park, n.y.c, among arbus\' work as a whole, as picturing people who are "pathetic, pitiable, as well as repulsive." his right hand tightly clamps a toy grenade - that looks very real - while his left hand looks like a claw.
photographing as a spectator in a crowd of (mostly) male onlookers, arbus successfully exposes the voyeuristic male gaze projected onto the contestants\' bodies. her photo crystallized the moral issues traditionally plaguing women in american society: objectification through the male gaze.
in this tightly cropped portrait of a middle-aged woman, arbus alludes to the highly nuanced idea that identity is constructed. here, arbus is speaking to the idea of ones perceived self vs. the true self.
his first commission from mexican minister of education jose vasconcelos, creation is the first of rivera\'s many murals and a touchstone for mexican muralism. it depicts a number of allegorical figuresamong them faith, hope, charity, education, and scienceall seemingly represented with unmistakably mexican features.
rivera revisits the theme of mexican history in this crowded, dynamic composition, replete with meaningful portraits, historical figures, and symbolic elements.  as in many previous works, rivera juxtaposes historical events and figures, deliberately rejecting the western tradition of linear narrative.'.
commissioned by the mexican government, this painting is a smaller but nearly identical recreation of man at the crossroads, the rockefeller-commissioned mural for the soon-to-be-completed rockefeller center.  the new york city mural was destroyed a year before this work, amid controversy over rivera\'s portrait of lenin and his subsequent refusal to remove the image.'.
motherhood is a modernizing, cubist treatment on a perennial art historical theme: the madonna and child. in this painting, angelina beloff, rivera\'s common-law wife for twelve years, holds their newborn son, diego, who died of influenza just months after his birth.
the twenty-seven panels comprising this cycle are a tribute to detroit\'s manufacturing base and workforce of the 1930s and constitute the finest example of fresco painting in the united states. other dichotomies recur in this work, as rivera contrasts tradition and progress, industry and nature, and north and south america.
a stunning tribute to two of rivera\'s favorite mastersel greco and paul czanne view of toledo exemplifies rivera\'s tendency to unite traditional and more modern approaches in his work. at the same time, the subdued palette, flattened forms, and unconventional use of perspective suggest the artist\'s reverence for czanne, his l\'estaque landscapes.
 executed at the height of the mexican revolution, the paintinglater described by its creator as "probably the most faithful expression of the mexican mood that i have ever achieved"manifests the increasing politicization of rivera\'s work.' in this work, painted during rivera\'s sojourn in paris, the artist deployed cubisma style he once characterized as a "revolutionary movement"to depict the mexican revolutionary leader emiliano zapata, here seen with attributes such as a rifle, bandolier, hat, and sarape.
john singer sargent painted a smaller scale copy of las meninas in 1879 and later used a similar composition in his the daughters of edward darly boit. picasso painted many versions of las meninas in his own avant-garde cubist style but maintained velazquez\'s general form, naturalness, and positioning of the figures.
about forty years of age in this painting, pareja was a sevillian of moorish descent and a slave, whom velzquez had inherited from a relative. he had been working in velazquez\'s studio since the 1630s and soon after this portrait was made, pareja was given his freedom.
all hands visible are near christ, who gazes up, out of the immediate space. the man across from him leans toward christ, and gestures in his direction even as he addresses his fellow disciple.
as laura cumming wrote in the vanishing velazquez, "velazquez began the picture six years after meeting spinola, yet the portrait is quick with character and life. in the midst of an unpopular war to subdue the netherlands, the surrender of breda captures a moment of spanish mercy and strength.
in the painting, the god is surrounded by eight drinkers, which was a rare subject in spanish painting. the scene is a depiction of bacchus, or dionysis, the god who rewards men with wine, temporarily releasing them from their problems.
this work represents one of judd\'s early experiments in minimalism: a freestanding, aluminum rectangle colored with brown enamel.  in this manner, judd has begun to use a new visual language for three-dimensional form, one that emphasizes the simplicity and physical nature of the piece.'.
the exterior surface is composed of copper, an industrial material, but one whose warm and reflective surface combines with the richness of the wooden floor as it mirrors its environment. the interior is colored with a highly saturated, red enamel that vibrates in its intensity and contrasts with the static nature of the form in its entirety.
here, judd has begun working with plexiglas and has combined it with a highly polished, reflective metal -- brass. this work is comprised of six identical, separate units with equal space in between each one.
as a g.i., judd had come across a military site in marfa, texas, which he later purchased with the help of the dia foundation in new york and which would eventually become the chinati foundation.  judd had always been critical of the way his works had been displayed and with the creation of the chinati, he was finally able to control all aspects of his work.'.
each unit has the same measurements -- 2.5 x 2.5 x 2.5 meters -- and thus is large enough to enter. the 15 concrete works that run along the border of the chinati\'s property were the first works to be installed at the museum and were cast over a four-year period from 1980 through 1984.
donatello produced the bust (although its authorship is sometimes contested) soon after uzzano\'s death in 1433. niccolo da uzzano was an important figure in florentine politics in the early decades of the 15th century, who acted as a respected intermediary figure between the city\'s powerful rival families.
donatella\'s project contrasted greatly with della robbia\'s.  it is interesting that donatello took such pains over the materiality of marble in this work, as it was the last major commission that he completed in this medium.'.
donatello\'s life-size depiction of mary magdalene wandering through the desert in penitence is one of his most moving works. in this work, donatello emphasizes the humanity of biblical characters, presenting mary magdalene as a relatable figure to be pitied and admired on a human level as a well as idolized on a saintly level.
the precise date for this early work by donatello is not known, but between 1408-1415 the artist worked on this large-scale marble figurative sculpture depicting saint john the evangelist. this sculpture is seen as an important step away from the gothic style that predominated in florentine (and european) art at this point.
donatello was commissioned by the swordmakers\' and armorers\' guild to carve this sculpture of their patron saint, st. the marble panel at the base is also an important work of art in its own right.
it was during this trip that carrington met the writer gerald brenan, who became one of her lovers. this painting depicts watendlath farm, near keswick in the lake district of england, where she spent a summer holiday with her husband and their friends in 1921.
carrington had known strachey for many years at the time of this painting, having met her during the early years of her friendship with lytton strachey. julia strachey was a writer, and her guarded expression and steady gaze give the impression a woman with a clever wit and critical eye.
 through its bringing together old and new styles, it anticipates - if only faintly - the dramatic shifts on the horizon for the modern art world.' carrington\'s portrait of strachey was painted during the first world war, but its gentle, peaceful mood is worlds away from the fear and anxiety of war.
this painting depicts carrington\'s friend, the writer e. m. forster. the painting differs slightly from carrington\'s earlier portraits in that it uses a looser, more impressionist painting style.
the textured foil and the warm, metallic hues of the piece lend it a romantic, old-fashioned delicacy. the unique technique reveals carrington\'s ingenuity as an artist and her willingness to combine old traditions with new ones.
this painting depicts the quaint home in the english countryside shared by carrington and lytton strachey from 1917 to 1924. carrington depicts a tranquil, but lively scene.
in the early 1930s maar traveled to various places in europe working as a photojournalist, but she also began taking her own pictures. tending toward street scenes and glimpses of the isolated nature of city life, these works are often melancholy, quietly piquant, and effortlessly framed.
like maar\'s other surrealist photomontages, le simulateur deliberately unsettles. le simulateur is a disorienting, impossible photomontage of a curved crypt-like space with blacked-out windows and a young boy curving his body back into the wall.
by the time maar was creating these landscapes, she was almost totally withdrawn from the art world. english art critic john russell, who befriended maar in the 1950s, explained, "[her paintings] represent, beyond question, a solitary\'s view of the world.".
as an example of the latter, she crafted advertisements such as one for \'petrole hahn\' hair products. here a pink bottle of hair oil tips over on its side, emptying its contents.
it is certainly tempting to read into maar\'s works in terms of biography: lauren greenwald writes, "[untitled] seems almost prescient, as the artist would eventually retreat into her own self-contained world." indeed, it was through a performance with her own hand that maar first met picasso.
in her later work, lange\'s more interesting portraits are characterized by their psychological depth and intensity.  with the woman in the lighted foreground, lange casts the female into the role of actor, while the man is relegated to the shadows.'.
probably the most famous of lange\'s photographs, the description she wrote of her encounter with florence owens thompson reveals that it left a deep impression on her. she said they had been living on frozen vegetables from the surrounding fields, and birds that the children killed.
this is a photo of the members of the mochida family awaiting an evacuation bus. identification tags are used to aid in keeping the family unit intact during all phases of evacuation.
lange was an ardent activist and felt strongly about racism.  this separation is illustrated in the contrast between dark hats and jackets of the workers, and the light clothing of the overseer.'.
one of lange\'s better-known photographs, she often cited this particular scene when speaking about her breakthrough into documentary photography. drawn to the lines of people waiting for worker\'s compensation or food relief, the image of this elderly man waiting for food at the soup kitchen embodies the depressed mood of the times.
eine kleine nachtmusik is another relatively early work for tanning, painted with figurative perfection and an obvious closeness to surrealist themes. tanning wrote herself of eine kleine nachtmusik, "it\'s about confrontation.
her only large-scale installation works, htel du pavot, chambre 202 was created for a retrospective at the centre georges pompidou in 1974. indeed, the work does point towards the possibility of physical violence experienced by women and simultaneously laments and berates this.
by the late 1990s, tanning\'s focus had shifted again from painting, to sculpture, to poetry. all of the flower paintings glow with soft and illuminating depth.
a later sculptural piece by tanning, nue couche introduces her weighty, contorted and headless figures. although the title translates to \'reclining nude\' the work stands in defiant subversion to the traditional languid and passive reclining female sitter of classical painting.
self portrait shows tanning as a young woman with her head on her hand looking out at the viewer in a typically reflective artist\'s pose.  for to \'see\' into the depths, as is demonstrated by tanning and by other surrealist artists, is actually a more complex and internal process.'.
during the mid-1950s, tanning experienced a dramatic stylistic shift. tempte en jaune maintains tanning\'s signature sunflower palate and whirling cloth-like movement, but here an overall feeling of dream is conjured up, rather than specific emblems explored.
by painting the name as if it were made of bright orange maple syrup, ruscha presents a characterization of the text as vibrant, sweet, and warm. annie was the name of a little orphan girl, a central character in a namesake popular movie of the time, who stole the hearts of america.
ruscha later stated that the word "boss" "was a powerful word to me, and it meant various things - an employer, and a term for something cool. ruscha uses this multiplicity of meaning to encourage the viewer to consider all the subconscious connotations of the word.
this book, folding out to twenty-seven feet, records every building on both sides of los angeles\'s sunset strip. ruscha has described every building on the sunset strip as a "historical archive" and it can be seen as a demonstration of his belief that photography was best used as a means of communicating information.
large trademark with eight spotlights is an 11ft-wide painting featuring the 20th century fox logo, a well-known image from the beginning of many hollywood films. this is one of several pieces that deal with the culture of hollywood in ruscha\'s los angeles.
it\'s more like i\'m painting ideas of ideas of mountains. [...] mountains like this were only ever a dream to me." here, snow-capped blue mountains sit against a yellow sky, while the incongruous phrase "pay nothing until april" is overlaid in the foreground.
he claimed that the gas stations he encountered along the way became "like a musical rhythm to me - cultural belches in the landscape." he took photographs of the gas stations, stopping the car across the road and getting out to capture them.
view is a collage that acts as a commentary on photography\'s role in the post-war united states. ruscha uses photography as a tool for communication rather than as an end in itself; his emphasis on the organisation of images, through collage or in books, has been tremendously influential.
like his earlier study of the bellelli family, a cotton office in new orleans is the result of several individual sketches and careful attention to detail over a length of time. in the center, reading a newspaper, is degas\'s brother, rene, and in the foreground, somberly handling a ball of cotton, is rene\'s father-in-law, michael musson, who operated the cotton exchange.
this unconventional portrait of manet and his wife provides a wonderful example of degas as the distant spectator, capturing a moment of solitude that the subjects might prefer go unnoticed.  why manet cut the picture down remains unknown.'.
la toilette is typical of degas\'s many nudes, and typical of an approach to the nude that made this body of work particularly controversial - both among his contemporaries and among latter day critics. critics attacked his nudes for never having distinct faces, and seemingly to be wiping themselves as if they are not clean.
it is characteristic of a number of wax sculptures he produced after the 1860s. in fact, 27 bronze sculptures were made.
this portrait, with its subdued palette and its unconventional grouping of figures, such as the man having his back to the viewer, demonstrates the impact of realism on the young degas. each family member  his aunt, her husband and his two young cousins giovanna and giuliana  was sketched individually, and then organized into a family portrait, becoming more of a study of individual personalities than a study of them as a group.
paolozzi\'s figure is similarly complex; it is both seeing and unseeing, and it is both imposing and melancholic. the title and eye-like wheel on the figure\'s head make reference to the cyclops, a one-eyed giant of greek mythology.
sadly, however, part of the mosaic was lost when transport for london redeveloped tottenham court road station in 2015. one of paolozzi\'s largest projects began when he was commissioned to design 1000 square meters of mosaics for the london underground tube station at tottenham court road.
to produce this work, paolozzi created a series of collages, which he then combined as if they were slides for a film. for most of the images, paolozzi chose older photographs or images from magazines, creating a sense of nostalgia that runs throughout the film.
the silken world of michelangelo is part of a series that paolozzi produced as an unbound book called moonstrips empire news. it is a medium that was being explored by american pop artists such as andy warhol, and paolozzi\'s pop art screen-prints run in a similar vein, working with a consciousness of the pop art movement that he helped to initiate.
contemporary with the scream, munch\'s madonna is rendered with softer brushstrokes and comparatively subdued pigments. indeed, munch\'s madonna may very well be a modernist, if irreverent depiction of the immaculate conception.
if the sick child is a loving tribute to munch\'s favorite sister, johanne sophie, night in st. created not long after munch\'s arrival in paris, night in st.
agony, anxiety and loss are constant themes throughout munch\'s oeuvre, yet perhaps nowhere do they come together as powerfully as in munch\'s puberty, a portrait of adolescence and isolation. the aesthetic qualities of post-impressionism are still very much present in munch\'s work at this time, but what sets his work apart is the powerful element of symbolism.
in spring ploughing, one can see the inspiration munch took from the much younger franz marc - whose expressionist paintings were originally inspired by munch - who had a penchant for painting animals in their natural surroundings. this new-found inspiration, in the form of farm hands, animals, and the norwegian landscape, took munch\'s art in an entirely new direction, one celebrating life and work, rather than anxiety and loss.
the sick child is one of munch\'s earliest works, considered by the artist "a breakthrough" for setting the tone for his early career in which death, loss, anxiety, madness, and the preoccupations of a troubled soul were his chief subject matter. the rough brushstrokes, scratched surface and melancholic tones of this painting all reveal a highly personal memorial.
the city stands as one of clark\'s first major experiments in abstraction. the painting evolved while he was working on a realistic representation of the city; dissatisfied with his results, he proceeded to "destroy" the image with his brush but found he liked the result of his destruction.
although not the first, this work is amongst clark\'s early experimentations with shaped paintings.  like many of clark\'s works, this piece is large in scale, measuring 46 by 55 inches'.
this image perfectly captures hopper\'s brilliant depictions of the isolation of the individual within the modern urban city. hopper\'s automat captures a woman who has stepped out of the busy urban scene incumbent with necessary human interaction, taking refuge in the respite provided by a local diner.
though many have speculated about the location of the gas station, hopper claims it was improvised, made up from his memory of a number of similar places. hopper\'s gas offers a perfect example of the artist\'s ability to raise a simple subject with no action to that of a psychologically-charged one.
in ground swell, hopper depicts a catboat occupied by four young men and a woman facing a growing swell.  there is some suggestion that it symbolically represents the loss of innocence in the face of an uncertain, ominous future.'.
house by the railroad is, like other hopper works, about a lot more than its simple title indicates.  hopper was delighted later on to learn that alfred hitchcock used it as inspiration for the house in his 1960 film, "psycho."'.
open-ended narratives of this nature are typical of hopper and demand the active role of the viewer in completing the story. hopper claimed that the setting was loosely based on a restaurant on greenwich avenue, in new york.
office at night depicts a woman and a man alone in an office. the woman, ostensibly the secretary, stands at a filing cabinet looking at a piece of paper that seems to have just fallen on the floor.
second story sunlight, painted late in his career addresses concerns focused on throughout his lifetime in his quest to render the elusive, shifting character of sunlight, and its suggestive quality. this work, focusing on a pair of gabled houses facing the morning sun, offers an excellent example of how hopper elevated cityscapes to psychological portraits, positively animating the inanimate and injecting it with significance.
the walk-in installation the beanery is one of kienholz\'s most admired works. while the installation reconstructs the general layout of the pub, the beanery is also surreal, featuring denizens with faces formed out of clocks, all of which are set to the same time of 10:10.
this work from the volksempfngers series, titled the bench, is named after the plinths that are central to the sculptural installation and features eights radios placed on top of two platforms. for this series, the artists purchased discarded radios at flea markets and repurposed them as art objects, at times arranging them in series, combining them with other objects, or inserting sound-based elements.
 like much of his later work, the illegal operation broaches a controversial topic while insisting that matters of political and social discourse are never unwarranted artistic subjects.' wade ruling, which legalized abortion in the united states, the illegal operation depicts the scene of an abortion at a time when the procedure was practiced in secrecy, often in dangerous and unregulated conditions.
kienholz constructed this massive installation, measuring thirty-three feet long, during the vietnam war as a bitter commentary on the united states\' international politics, the human sacrifice of military actions, and the consumerism of the american dream. on the central, tombstone-shaped panel of the composition, a blackboard records the fading names of hundreds of countries that have been obliterated by war throughout history.
the state hospital was inspired by kienholz\'s experiences working as an attendant in a mental hospital in the late 1940s. in the inhumane confinement of these emaciated patients, kienholz was commenting on societal and institutional mistreatment of the mentally ill.
as one of weston\'s monumental close-ups, cabbage leaf heightens ones visual understanding of this vegetable with its solitary display of a flayed leaf. weston photographed arrangements of cabbage over a nine-year period, from 1927 to 1936.
weston created excusado (the spanish word meaning "excused" and a slang term for "toilet") during his second trip to mexico in 1925. both encourage the viewer to reconsider the value of a banal object- the toilet.
in the late 1920s, edward weston began photographing what he called "still-lifes" or individual ordinary objects at close range.  indeed, one finds similarities between his pepper #30 and surrealist hans arp\'s curvaceous, even lumpy, sculptures created at approximate the same time.'.
in tomato field, monterey coast, weston accomplishes what paul strand managed in wall street (1915) and his other photographs of new york city. tomato field, monterey coast is a quintessential example of this.
the 38-story cbs building serves as the headquarters of cbs corporation, but not the actual broadcast centers for any of its media. the cbs building should also be noted for its significant process of collaboration between the architects and their client, cbs chairman william s. paley.
unlike those two skyscrapers, the gm technical center consists of a sprawling horizontally-oriented 710-acre campus. along with structures such as the lever house and seagram building in new york, the general motors technical center is one of the projects that best exemplifies the new identity of american corporate modernism in the 1950s.
saarinen\'s only work in the state of pennsylvania, hill college house is exemplary amongst his numerous designs for student housing on american university campuses. the severe brick envelope, however, only underscores the way in which hill college house brings its residents together on the inside; indeed, saarinen\'s guiding theme when designing the complex was "a small village, self-sufficient, inward-focused and protected.".
saarinen completed several buildings for yale, his alma mater, among which the ingalls ice rink was the first. oddly, despite the fact that saarinen was finnish, he had never designed any sporting venue before, let alone a hockey rink.
but whereas jefferson and palladio\'s buildings dominate the environment through their elevated placement and monumental domes, the miller house uses a different strategy. in this way, saarinen demonstrates his own keen understanding of history by linking the miller house to a specific lineage of great residential designs.
it was through his relationship with florence knoll that saarinen was able to develop the designs for the tulip series of furniture. the chairs are supposed to mirror this kind of unity, with saarinen observing that "[t]he undercarriage of chairs and tables in a typical interior makes an ugly, confusing, unrestful world.
death and the maiden was painted around the time schiele separated from his longtime lover, wally neuzil, and several months before he married his new lover, edith harms. the painting memorializes the end of his affair with neuzil, seemingly conveying this separation as the death of true love.
this rare double portrait, among the most allegorical works in schiele\'s oeuvre, shows schiele and klimt standing together, nearly as one.  the hermit motif also evokes schiele\'s existential conception of the artist as a figure existing at the margins of society.'.
this is one of schiele\'s many portraits of his younger sister, gerti, the artist\'s favorite model during his early career and the member of his family with whom he was the closest.  in addition, schiele replaced klimt\'s richly shimmering, gold-dominated palette with more muted colors, creating an image that appears dried-out, suggestive of decay rather than growth.'.
this is perhaps schiele\'s most celebrated self-portrait, and certainly the most storied.  it now serves as a "poster child" for the leopold museum in vienna, which houses the largest schiele collection in the world.'.
although his art centered on the human figure, schielewho had occasion to travel throughout europe during his careerwas also drawn to the land and cities. this canvas contains other characteristic elements of schiele\'s idiom as well, most notably, his use of boldly outlined and sharp contours.
angel of anarchy is a sculpture formed from a cylindrical plaster base and a \'head\' wrapped in various flamboyant materials, including black and green feathers, multicolored scarves, beads and shells. agar later recalled that the remade version was intended to be "more astounding, powerful (and forgetting about a portrait) more malign" than the original.
this relatively late work - agar was eighty when she created it - embraces the marine themes expressed through earlier pieces such as ceremonial hat. the title bride of the sea presumably refers to the woman whose silhouetted face appears in side-profile to the right of the canvas.
dylan thomas was an important figure in literary surrealism in britain in the 1930s-40s, and was part of the circle of artists and literary figures in which agar moved at that time. his face is loosely rendered in white flowing lines, on a canvas filled with abstract motifs, and what seem to be drip-painted features.
the silhouette is cut from a book on gemstones, and the grid-like arrangement of numbered stones jars with the compositional arrangement implied by the portrait. precious stones is a collage work, featuring a silhouette of a male face in profile pasted onto another white sheet of paper, framed in turn by a third sheet, which forms a red border around the image.
agar later described three symbols as her "first attempt at an imaginative approach to painting", and we can certainly sense the influence of surrealism on the ambiguous but symbolically allusive compositional elements. it is also work of personal significance, representing agar\'s attempt to strike out in a new artistic direction which was only unconsciously configured by surrealism.
the background features the trojan horse and the town of toledo surrounded by trees in intense blues and greens. the painting portrays the myth of laocoon, a trojan priest who according to legend, warned the locals about the trojan horse and also profaned the temple of god.
madonna and child with saint martina and saint agnes depicts mary and the baby jesus seated on clouds in heaven, accompanied by saint agnes holding a lamb on the bottom right and saint martina on the bottom left. the figures dominate most of this large-scale painting, intertwining with each other in a complex interdependent way.
this large painting, three and half meters wide by almost five meters high, is universally regarded as el greco\'s greatest masterpiece and most famous work. other notorious works of burials, painted after el greco\'s, include the burial at ornans (1849) by gustave coubert, the burial of the sardine (c. 1812-1819) by francisco goya, and the burial of st.
in the painting, el greco portrays st. el greco was fascinated with this subject, as it is generally sustained that his workshop possessed over a hundred representations of st.
in the work, picasso combined el greco\'s use of dark browns and ochres with his signature cubist language, echoing centuries later, el greco\'s ever-present iconography.   the painting is featured in the cover of a vangelis album entitled el greco from 1998.'.
this large canvas is considered another one of el greco\'s masterpieces. rumors state that the missing part may have depicted the sacrificial lamb opening the fifth seal.
the painting depicts a view of the city of toledo where el greco lived for most of his life. el greco approached the subject in the same manner as he did his other works, drawing inspiration from reality but remaining untrue to it.
beat the whites with the red wedge is one of lissitzky\'s earliest attempts at propagandistic art. the red wedge symbolized the revolutionaries, who were penetrating the anti-communist white army.
the end result for lissitzky was ideally to create an ongoing tension between open, negative, three-dimensional space and flat, purely abstract, geometric forms.  painting and drawing, which had formerly existed independently of the three-dimensional media of sculpture and architecture, could now be fused to them to create new, integrated forms - ideally, the futuristic, suprematist-style buildings lissitzky envisioned.'.
lissitzky once wrote of photography, "...photography possesses properties not available to painting. with the runner, lissitzky converted his 1926 gelatin silver print runner in the city into a stunning new visual reference to the modern celebration of speed and dynamism by splicing the photo into equal, vertical sections.
this poster was created for a 1929 exhibition at the kunstwerbemuseum or museum of decorative arts in zurich.  lissitzky had long envisioned his countrymen rising to new heights, both physically and spiritually.'.
inspired by what she witnessed inside these caves, de kooning began her cave painting series, which included this 1985 painting.  in this regard, elaine de kooning is one of only a few abstractionists who spoke openly about what directly inspired her work.'.
this portrait of fairfield porter, unlike her earlier self-portrait, indicates a greater sense of gestural abstraction, and even visual elements of what harold rosenberg called "action painting."  the end result is subtly haunting, and is a stunning balance of color and shade.'.
upon returning to new york city, de kooning worked tirelessly for nearly a year, sketching and re-sketching kennedy based on her original renderings, as well as from hundreds of newspaper clippings and other images.  evidently awed by the task at hand, de kooning\'s final product is a lean, vertical portrait with traditional dimensions, her gestural rhythms evoking the restlessness of her subject.'.
in the mid 1940s, elaine and willem were poorer than ever, and both were experiencing great difficulty in selling any work. in an effort to make money, de kooning painted this realist self-portrait and sold it to her sister for a sum of $20, which she described at the time as "good money.".
named after the ray charles/betty carter song murray listened to while working on the piece, it reverberates with humor. do the dance is a vibrant and effervescent depiction of movement, music, and life.
however, the pink line is deliberately curving and playful - princenthal calls it "unleashed" - and it refuses to take the form of the minimalists\' grid or the hard edges of the cubists. this is one of murray\'s self-labeled \'transitional works\', where she was "being playful in [her] choice of color," increasing the size of the work, and endeavoring to open up the canvas in innovative ways.
wake up, one of murray\'s first multi-part, shaped works, is a recognizable object: a teacup, split in two by a jagged lightning shape. instead, she highlighted the "symbolism and metaphor...and sexuality of the cup" (in murray\'s words) - more meret oppenheim than mary cassatt in its insouciance.
in black over blue, the curved, black panel extends beyond the confines of the rectangular blue canvas, making the surrounding wall an essential part of the composition. upon returning to new york after six influential years in paris, kelly progressed beyond his multiple-panel paintings to reliefs.
the large-scale colors for a large wall is one of kelly\'s early forays into multi-panel paintings, a fundamental motif throughout his career.  much of kelly\'s subsequent work stemmed from this painting, as he continued to juxtapose panels of differing sizes, shapes, colors and materials in innumerable variations.'.
 he encouraged his viewers to question traditional perspectives by creating sculptural paintings that might sit on the floor and flat sculptures that lean against a wall.' during the 1970s and 1980s, inspired by his move to the pastoral upstate new york, kelly began expanding his use of the curve and making large, totem-like sculptures - many designed to be displayed outdoors.
in red blue green, part of his crucial series exploring this motif, kelly\'s sharply delineated, bold red and blue shapes both contrast and resonate with the solid green background, taking natural forms as inspiration. kelly put great emphasis on the tensions between the \'figure\' and the \'ground\' in his paintings, aiming to establish dynamism within otherwise flat surfaces.
in the 1990s, kelly further developed the possibilities of the relief and continues expanding on this motif today. red diagonal employs a striking, geometric construction that echoes the forms created by his earlier panels attached side-by-side.
as an etching, joy in life exemplifies how nolde engaged with the medium in a new and dynamic way. he produced joy in life shortly before joining the die brcke group after having been in conversation with its members during this period.
mask still life iii depicts five masks with various grotesque expressions. nolde\'s piece takes these motifs and pushes them farther - there is no human figure in his masks to ground the piece in the familiar or with whom viewers can identify.
meer bei alsen (sea off alsen) is one of nolde\'s earliest representations of the sea, showing waves crashing and clouds moving across the sky. his isolated location allowed for few distractions and he increasingly used color to respond to the natural world around him.
religious subject matter appeared in nolde\'s oeuvre shortly after recovering from a bout with food poisoning that nearly killed him. however, this painting is starkly different from traditional representations of the religious scene.
an example of nolde\'s watercolor works, tulips shows a brilliant bouquet of the flowers against an indeterminate background. his watercolor paintings came to be regarded as a symbol of resistance to the nazi regime.
within his career, fischl completed several paintings of nude scenes sea or poolside. the foreshortened figure of a nude woman reclines on a raft while a child snorkels beneath her.
the boy is seen in mid-theft but his pose suggests preternatural confidence, as though he\'s done this before. bad boy offers a scene of daytime noir in which the harlot and the scamp are dramatically lit, the sheets are rumpled, and a screw is followed by a theft.
a young man stands in a plastic swimming pool in a suburban backyard, shoulders hunched, gaze fixed downward, penis in hand. note the quadrupled circles - his head, his head\'s reflection, the round pool, and the round lawn - allusions to a spotlit subject on an accidental stage.
in this oil painting, fischl captures an unorthodox portrait of francesco clemente, an artist friend, and his family. the family members are widely dispersed within a dark room, pierced in sections by harsh light that may come from an opening door.
after being discharged from the military, kirchner took refuge in davos, where the alps surrounding his home provided a new kind of bucolic inspiration.  the swooping perspective is similar to kirchner\'s early paintings of urban life.'.
emblematic of his die brucke phase, marzella is a provocative depiction of a young, pre-pubescent girl. around the time this picture was painted kirchner was spending time around the moritzberg lakes, and the girl depicted is the daughter of a circus artiste\'s widow that he met there.
created during the die brucke era, the work exemplifies the energetic atmosphere of a meeting in kirchner\'s studio, a recurrent scene in his pictures. this woodcut print features a group of voluptuous nude female dancers on stage.
self-portrait as a soldier examines the psychological distress experienced by kirchner during his service in the military.  in the background of kirchner\'s picture stands a nude who bears a resemblance to his lover of the time, erna schilling.'.
the vigorously painted street, berlin explores the figure of the city prostitute: chic streetwalkers who have angular, mask-like faces. street, berlin accentuates the hidden sensuality beneath the prostitutes\' haughty fashion.
hesse called hang up her earliest important artistic "statement", due to its successful manifestation of her fascination with "absurdity." the seemingly simple addition of the long metal rod to a canvas in hang up dramatically transformed a painting into a sculpture, symbolizing the artist\'s own transition from working in two to three dimensions.
lucy lippard, who organized the seminal show eccentric abstraction, was originally disappointed with hesse\'s selection of metronomic irregularity ii for the exhibition, due primarily to the work\'s apparent lack of sexual or organic qualities.  the push and pull between these different sources of inspiration and such starkly contrasting textures create a dissonance that gives metronomic irregularity a unique intensity, evoking at once the beat of a clock and the disarray of an all-enveloping windstorm.'.
the cylindrical structures of repetition nineteen iii are of fiberglass, one of the many industrial materials that hesse experimented with in her later work. visually simple in its design, repetition is actually complex for its many associations, both to hesse\'s work to that date, as well as to the world around her.
a german exhibition by jean tinguely may have triggered the kitschy, playful vein of ringaround arosie, although hesse was already familiar with the erotic surrealism of marcel duchamp.  as if giving birth to another dimension in her own work, this first relief by hesse is an important landmark in her evolving path from painting to so-called "eccentric" sculpture.'.
broadway south of union square, a manhattan street scene, dates to the final year of porter\'s life. this cityscape places the viewer at the corner of broadway and 12th street, facing north towards the greenery and open public areas of union square.
porter routinely experimented more with color when painting outside, yet his subjects always remained identifiable. "the visual complexity of this landscape painting underscores the richness of porter\'s family history.
this scene of porter\'s daughter katherine and wife anne is characteristic of the artist\'s oeuvre.  porter sought, as did matisse, to make every corner of the canvas alive."'.
the mirror\'s composition is complex: elizabeth faces the viewer (and, by implication, the artist), and the mirror acts as a picture-within-a-picture, reflecting porter as well as the room and the landscape beyond the window. porter painted several self-portraits of himself in the studio, and here he combines a self-portrait with a portrait of his ten-year-old daughter elizabeth in the family\'s southampton house.
this untitled work from 1945 depicts manhattan\'s first avenue, presumably the corner just a half-block from the family home on east 52nd street. due to the financial hardships of world war ii, porter and his family rarely traveled outside new york city between 1941 and 1946, forgoing visits to their home on maine\'s great spruce head island.
another section reads, "sleeping on tar beach was magical ...only eight years old and in the third grade and i can fly. tar beach, ringgold\'s best known work, is the first quilt in her woman on a bridge series about a young african american girl, cassie louise lightfoot, growing up in harlem.
a subject depicted many times by fra angelico, the coronation of the virgin illustrates the crowning of the virgin mary as the queen of heaven. fra angelico\'s use of it here hindered his usual deep, panoramic backgrounds, but he was still able to create the illusion of some space.
set in a simple columned loggia with a minimal landscape to the left, fra angelico creates a dramatic scene. be it unto me according to thy word") are written on the surface of the painting, fra angelico followed his contemporary massacio\'s lead in creating weighty, solid figures situated in a rationally designed space.
the wealthy florentine banker palla strozzi commissioned lorenzo monaco to create an altar for his family\'s funerary chapel, and it was installed in 1432. in either instance, angelico created an innovative scene of serenity and drama within the confines of an old-fashioned gothic frame.
it is possible that fra angelico took over this commission after his teacher lorenzo monaco died. depicting the narrative in which christ decides whether the deceased should go to heaven or hell, it is a visually complex composition that shows fra angelico adapting traditional last judgment prototypes with new innovations.
however, like louise bourgeois\' in her drawings and sculptures of the \'femme maison\', woodman appears to absorb strength from her own disintegration. if the house is considered as a protective dwelling place it could then be considered substitute for our first dwelling place, that of the womb.
in on being an angel #1, the artist reclines backwards, naked, exposing her shoulders and chest, as she looks straight into the camera. it is the first picture of the larger body of work that explores the woodman\'s recurring interest of being an angel.
the parallel affirms woodman and michael\'s shared interest in conjuring mystical atmosphere, and highlights the fact that woodman was powerfully influenced by the work of others.  woodman had encountered michael\'s work in exhibitions.'.
 woodman looks down hopefully, as though summoning the powers and comforts of nature as the only possibility to heal her troubled mind.' this photograph depicts woodman wearing a dress with a pattern reminiscent of tree bark; meanwhile she looks coyly downwards at the exquisite birch tree cuffs that protectively encircle her arms.
 art critic james mcmillian writes that upon viewing woodman\'s book works that a conflict is resolved and some level of angst dissipates.' woodman had found five other old school books in the secondhand bookshop in rome, but some disordered interior geometries was the only one completed and published, released to the public just days before her suicide.
this photograph is part of an unfinished project called study for the temple project. woodman was initially inspired by details of bathrooms in new york city that had been designed with classical references in mind.
here particularly there is no severance but instead woodman\'s hair becomes an aggrandizing force. the suggestion is usually (as has also been explored by frida kahlo and rebecca horn) that cutting one\'s hair is done in response to trauma, and specifically to the devastating situation of a failed love relationship.
in this work woodman makes her own wings using white sheets. woodman traveled to rome after her graduation, and lived there for a year as part of the rhode island\'s school of design\'s rome honours program.
the art critic kyle macmillian writes of woodman that "she wanted to evoke the elusive, the transient realm between what is and isn\'t". overall in this work, woodman further explores liminal themes of the visible and invisible, the possible and the impossible, and the threshold between life and death.
the canvas compresses the body of clemente\'s wife, alba, into an improbable reclining pose. wearing an off-the-shoulder red dress, red flats, red lipstick, and a bulbous golf cuff bracelet, she gazes at the viewer with penetrating, somewhat dolorous brown eyes.
they are confined within him, but they define him; his real face, his real identity, is a facade. there is something unsettling about the figure: his face is a hollow mask.
clemente\'s gloves and genitals are the only detailed elements, the rest is set out in bold dark strokes. a nude man, again with clemente\'s features, and the distorted proportions of a homunculus, holds his head between the fingers of his two gloved hands.
but it may be significant also that these figures, despite the purpose that forward motion can provide, must all march inevitably off the platform to the ground below and beyond the frame. whether we are looking at a crowd or a montage, it is the forward motion that allows the figures to demonstrate purpose within these bleak surroundings - just as our goals and aspirations, our own forward motion, allow us to transcend our own surroundings.
a rope, tied as a harness around the beast\'s torso, dangles from the top of the frame. against a backdrop of blue bricks, two nude figures interact with the standing corpse of a horned she-beast: a distressed man stands holding its severed head, while a more comfortable looking woman reclines underneath while suckling the beast\'s teat.
the layered images of this enigmatic painting blend into each other, giving it a dreamlike (or nightmarish) quality. "the one like a butcher\'s shop, it came to me as an accident," he once said of the picture.
bacon was in his 60s when he met the young george dyer. dyer was constantly in need of attention and reassurance, and the naked embryonic form kneeling precariously on a ledge expresses his vulnerability.
three studies launched bacon\'s reputation in the mid 1940s and shows the importance of biomorphic surrealism in forging his early style. bacon may have originally intended to incorporate the figures in a crucifixion, but his reference to the base of such a composition suggests that he imagined them as part of a predella, the scenes at the bottom of a traditional altarpiece.
picabia\'s mechanomorphic pictures suggest analogies between machines and the human form. in this work, picabia blended male and female; the upper part in red might be considered female and the lower part in blue, male.
picabia met marcel duchamp around 1911, and dances at the spring, which echoes duchamp\'s nude descending a staircase (1912), points to the important impact this meeting would have on him. picabia with particularly interested in representing motion on canvas, celebrating dancing on the surface.
this enigmatic painting is part of picabia\'s transparency series, whose dream-like quality derives from layers of imagery that faintly suggest strange narratives. picabia refuses this temptation, instead leaving the statue enigmatically layered with a smiling face and leaving us with a mystery.
at first picabia worked closely with alfred stieglitz, who gave him his first one-man show in new york city. in 1918, picabia would make a portrait of his friend, the poet guillaume apollinaire.
after world war i broke out, picabia became fascinated with the idea of industrial objects as a pictorial source. it stands to remember that picabia loved machines, an in particular cars.
with dead men!, plate 39 of the series, goya depicts three male corpses, whose bodies have been mutilated, castrated, and tied to a tree. it is difficult to imagine 20th-century war photography (one thinks of the famous images from the my lai massacre in vietnam, for instance) without goya\'s disasters.
this portrait of the spanish royal family was made at the height of goya\'s career as a court painter. the artist based the composition on velzquez\'s las meninas, which also includes a self-portrait of the artist in the act of painting the royal family.
saturn devouring his son is another of goya\'s "black paintings" produced at la quinta del sordo. with his small head and bulging eyes, saturn opens wide his mouth to gnaw on the arm of his son.
the nude maja (la maja desnuda) was one of the first paintings goya made for prime minister manuel de godoy, one of his primary patrons. goya also created a companion piece - la maja vestida, or the clothed maja - which offers a more chaste version of the same female portrait.
the sleep of reason produces monsters, plate 43 in the series, depicts a sleeping man (thought to be goya himself), surrounded by a swarm of strange flying creatures. these are the "monsters" of the title, which invade the mind when reason is surrendered to imagination and dreams.
the dead bodies of just-executed rebels lie at his feet, while a group of soon-to-be shot rebels stand behind him. goya painted the third of may, 1808 and its companion piece, the second of may, 1808 for the spanish government, which commissioned the works to celebrate the expulsion of the french army in 1814.
he has painted numerous works of the street of mornington crescent, here depicting it on a frosty, barren morning.  though auerbach paints a specific place in mornington crescent, he impresses upon the viewer how it ultimately eludes him and us, functioning on the level of "art" and not on the "record."'.
auerbach\'s admiration for abstract expressionist willem de kooning is clear in his attempt to render the figure with abstract gestures. e.o.w. (estella "stella" olive west) was auerbach\'s first obsession as a painterly subject.
juliet yardley mills, or j.y.m., was a professional artists\' model and posed for auerbach twice a week for many years. the viewer is required to "work" to put together the image of j.y.m., synthesizing each brushstroke, each part into a tenuous whole.
painter and friend leon kossoff was a favorite early subject for auerbach. here the fellow school of london artist\'s face occupies nearly the entire picture plane, his head slightly tilted downward.
wright\'s dining room ensembles, especially from his prairie style years, are exemplary of several aspects of his furniture design. it also means that wright\'s furniture usually was custom-designed for individual houses, and that each building\'s furnishings are unique to it.
wright\'s most famous building, and likely the most famous modern house in the world, fallingwater is often seen as the commission that revived wright\'s career. wright built the house around the kaufmanns\' favorite sitting spot above the falls, allowing its rock to poke through the living room floor to preserve it.
the robie house exhibits a dichotomy between openness to the landscape and an emphasis on domestic privacy. typical of wright\'s prairie residences, the hearth, with its permanent seating, symbolizes the locus of the family unit and the generation of life-sustaining warmth during the frigid chicago winters.
the johnson wax buildings are wright\'s consummate statement in the art moderne style, a more austere, streamlined offshoot of art deco. the research tower, one of two skyscrapers wright completed in his life, represents his major structural innovation to the type.
the larkin building was unlike any purpose-designed office building of its time, so much so that contemporary critics and architects had difficulty understanding it using conventional standards of beauty, and many showered it with negative reviews. constructed in the midst of the soap company\'s industrial complex in the expanding city of buffalo, wright\'s structure of reinforced concrete appeared like a monolith sheathed in brick.
in more recent years, they have become crucial links to wright\'s debt to japanese artists and designers. wright\'s architectural drawings form an integral part of our understanding of him in many ways.
the guggenheim museum, for which wright received the commission in 1943, ranks at the top of this list. while wright was commissioned to house and highlight solomon guggenheim\'s significant collection of modern art, he decided instead to create a museum that would itself compete with the art as the actual showcase.
harran ii - whose title comes from the name of an ancient city in asia minor - invites parallels with sculpture as well as architecture. in his exploration of formal issues, stella habitually worked in series, developing increasingly complicated variations on selected themes.
the shaped canvas recurs in the works of stella\'s polish village series, to which michapol i belongs.  despite their sculptural qualities, stella described the impulse behind michapol i and the other works of the series as "pictorial."'.
prinz friedrich von homburg, ein schauspiel, 3x is just that - a massive composition whose spiraling forms and clusters continues the visual lexicon of the artist\'s painterly reliefs. given stella\'s creation of numerous, at times large-scale, paintings with protruding three-dimensional elements, the production of freestanding sculptures or architectural structures might have seemed the next logical step for the artist.
the present piece is part of stella\'s indian bird series, in which the artist further expanded the category of "painting."  stella began the series during his 1977 stay in ahmedabad, naming the individual works after birds found on the indian subcontinent.'.
belonging to the artist\'s groundbreaking series black paintings, the marriage of reason and squalor is composed of black inverted parallel u-shapes containing stripes separated by thin lines of unpainted canvas. along with three other of the black paintings, this work was included in the seminal moma exhibition sixteen americans.
black reflection is an example of kline\'s early attempts at introducing color back into his works. the focal point of this picture is the black shape that kline previously employed in the untitled composition of 1954.
critics\' comments on the pictures included in kline\'s breakthrough show of 1950 set the pattern for later reviews with their variety of analogies. many have since noted, however, that the forms in these early abstractions seem to have evolved from kline\'s drawings of his wife elizabeth.
meryon has a strong architectonic sense in its composition. the inspiration was possibly an engraving of a clock tower by the 19th-century french artist charles meryon.
probst i refers to jack probst, a fellow artist who lived near kline in greenwich village.  probst i is an example of kline\'s late work where he returned to employing a wider palette.'.
the painting is one of a series of four that marc painted in 1914, the other three works being cheerful forms (now destroyed), playing forms, and forms in combat. broken forms is one of marc\'s final works and showcases his ultimate move away from representation in painting.
the fate of the animals is a vision of annihilation as seen through the eyes of the animals. despite the chaos and destruction of the work, marc manages to create a balanced and ordered composition.
here, he depicts four blue horses, possibly representing the four horsemen of the apocalypse from the book of revelation. the horses are stacked one above the other, on an ascending, vertical plane, eschewing depth altogether.
the large yellow cow represents the feminine, since marc saw the color yellow as evoking feminine emotions. after marrying maria franck in 1911, marc painted the yellow cow as an homage to their union.
marc depicts the tiger in a moment just before attack; it is ready to break out of whatever is restraining it. the calm, dreamlike world of the yellow cow, is here replaced with a restless tension.
the painting depicts two fellow artists, maria schnur and maria franck, both of whom would also become his wives at different times. his two women on the hillside (1906) is an excellent example of this new stylistic interest.
this painting depicts the aurora borealis or northern lights flickering over the icy wastes of the arctic.  aurora borealis can therefore be seen as bringing together a range of contemporary perspectives on its subject-matter, speaking to both the pioneering scientific spirit and awe-seeking romantic sensiblities of its age.'.
this is one of several painting that church created following his travels across the middle east during the late 1860s and early 1870s. this sums up heady historical and intellectual conditions that underpinned the composition of works such as el khasn, petra.
cole, church\'s artistic and spiritual mentor, had been visiting the hudson valley since 1825 to make sketches for his work. this atmospheric sunrise is exemplary of church\'s early work, and of the influence of thomas cole in particular.
in this later work, church\'s focus shifts towards the huge cloud of spray at the foot of the falls. church had been visiting and painting the niagara falls since the 1850s, making oil sketches of the site during visits in 1857 and 1858.
ironically, humboldt passed away on 6 may 1959, just three days before church penned his letter to his friend. this is the largest and most significant of the works that church made following two visits to south america in 1853 and 1857.
 it has been suggested, that is, that the athlete is wrestling with his sexuality, his handling of the snake a visual allusion to masturbation.' his body poised and tensed, the athlete grasps the snake with both hands, one in front and one behind, squeezing its neck just below the head.
she therefore stands in for the absent sun, whose presence is implied by the almost-white strip of illuminated sea above her head. leighton\'s great late work flaming june depicts a woman curled up asleep on a marble bench.
this portrait is one of several that leighton created of the italian model nanna risi, mistress and muse of the artist anselm feuerbach. she is shown dressed in a variety of flowing fabrics, positioned against a background of blue-grey wallpaper and stuccoed neoclassical, \'grottoesque\' ornamentation.
the critic stephen jones describes the sluggard as "a remarkably experimental work - naturalistic in treatment, and yet still ideal in form". much like his athlete wrestling with a python, leighton\'s second notable sculpture is a life-size male nude cast in bronze.
it is as if in this painting kahlo tries on the role of wife to see how it fits. whilst rivera holds a palette and paint brushes, symbolic of his artistic mastery, kahlo limits her role to his wife by presenting herself slight in frame and without her artistic accoutrements.
after the new york exhibition, a second frame containing a mirror was added. all of these pictures, including fulang-chang and i include \'umbilical\' ribbons that wrap between kahlo\'s and the animal\'s necks.
however, kahlo had also just lost her own child and has said that she is the covered mother figure. the head of the woman giving birth is shrouded in white cloth while the baby emerging from the womb appears lifeless.
kahlo completed this work to accentuate both her european jewish heritage and her mexican background. this dream-like family tree was painted on zinc rather than canvas, a choice that further highlights the artist\'s fascination with and collection of 18th-century and 19th-century mexican retablos.
the cropped hair also presents a nuanced expression of the artist\'s identity. this self-portrait shows kahlo as an androgynous figure.
a dead hummingbird, a symbol in mexican folkloric tradition of luck charms for falling in love, hangs in the center of her necklace. typically a symbol of good fortune, the meaning of a \'dead\' hummingbird is to be reversed.
whereas kahlo\'s heart in the mexican dress remains sustained, the european kahlo, disconnected from her beloved diego, bleeds profusely onto her dress. it is the mexican kahlo that holds a locket with an image of rivera.
the 1946 painting, the wounded deer, further extends both the notion of chingada and the st. kahlo does not portray herself as a delicate and gentle fawn; she is instead a full-bodied stag with large antlers and drooping testicles.
more frequently associated with her psychological portraiture, kahlo in fact painted still lifes throughout her career. this still life is exemplary of kahlo\'s late work.
within the water, kahlo paints an alternative self-portrait, one in which the more traditional facial portrait has been replaced by an array of symbols and recurring motifs. furthermore, kahlo adopts a birds-eye view and looks down on the water from above.
orozco carefully photographed the work as well, staging it under a spotlight against a black support and backdrop. the endless black and white pattern in black kites entices the viewer to follow the lines and shapes across the curved surface of the skull in a studied, meditative manner.
referring to these pairs of objects as couples, orozco anthropomorphizes them, leaning them towards one another as if in intimate conversation or contact. orozco does not hide the materials (wood) and other physical features of these objects, which suggest their use within a construction site or other industrial environment.
one of orozco\'s more paradoxical works, la ds (pronounced to sound like "la desse," meaning "goddess" in french) is a citren automobile that has been dissected and then reassembled. though sleek, the car lacked an engine, making it impossible to use or control as a traditional car.
orozco imagined an enormous whale skeleton hovering over the central space of the library as he toured it during construction. from its placement overhead, viewers may not immediately notice the intricate details of the patterns on the whale skeleton.
presumably, a nike town would be a place where citizens adorn the celebrated footwear. orozco\'s photograph nike town provides a bird\'s eye view of a game being played, though the precise game, along with its rules and objectives, is left unspecified.
orozco began creating a series of abstract paintings called samurai tree invariants in the 2000s, surprising many critics and viewers who associated his work with more experimental art forms and subject matter. the process of splitting and extending these circles was repeated until orozco found a design he liked.
this photo depicts a close up snap shot of a couple dancing at the popular new york club called el morocco in 1955. it stands out for the strangeness of the moment winogrand chose to capture.
the scene, combined with the tilted frame and blurriness of the image create a feeling of primal instability. the wild look of the horse\'s eye heightens the chaos winogrand captured in this image.
hand feeding elephant trunk, zoo is from winogrand\'s first book, the animals. taken at the central park zoo, the image depicts the long trunk of an elephant reaching over its enclosure to catch peanuts falling from the open hand of a man.
many know this iconic image of marilyn monroe, shot on the set of the movie the seven year itch. the original photograph was taken as a publicity stunt for the movie, where over 20 photographers, including winogrand, were invited to photograph monroe, as the public also watched on adoringly.
in the image, activists gather to protest the shootings at kent state university in ohio, in which the national guard killed four students protesting the vietnam war. the men in hardhats are part of the 200 construction workers who infiltrated the protest in disgust of the activist\'s critique of america.
der wald auf dem kopf or the wood on its head is baselitz\'s first inverted painting, in which he upends his subject matter to frustrate recognition of the objects depicted. this radical approach troubles our ability to interpret the picture, leaving us wondering whether we are now looking at an abstraction or, simply, a conventional landscape upturned.
die grobe nacht im eimer or big night down the drain depicts a young boy, perhaps a self-portrait of the artist, holding an exaggerated phallus, and is one of baselitz\'s most controversial paintings. the shocking subject was intended to encourage an awakening that baselitz thought was necessary in a post-war germany lulled into amnesia about its recent past.
head and bottle best showcases georg baselitz\'s vigorous energy as a printmaker: the monumental print is 1000 x 485 mm in scale. although the work depicts the bust of a man, through inversion the image is confused and hovers on the verge of abstraction.
modell fur eine skulptur (model for a sculpture), baselitz\'s first sculpture, typifies his crude treatment of wood in this medium - a treatment analogous to his treatment of paint in his previous work.  the gesture of the figure - a figure bound to the ground by a block of wood - might simply communicate frustration.'.
the rebel exemplifies baselitz\'s early portraits. typical are the distorted proportions and exaggerated anatomical structure.
painted the year after world war ii ended, peace, ii, conveys grosz\'s grim vision of the war\'s aftermath. his view of humanity\'s tendency toward destruction proved true, and after a second world war, only his style had changed.
the image led to a trial against grosz and his publisher, wieland herzfelde, who were both accused of blasphemy. this image chastises german society\'s march toward world war ii, deploying religious imagery to incite anger in the viewer.
this work, also known by the title fit for active service, depicts a doctor inspecting a skeleton with an ear trumpet, pronouncing him "kv" (short for kriegsverwendungsfahig, or "fit for combat").  grosz is best known for his drawings and works on paper, and the faith healers is an exemplary work of his highly politically charged style that overlaps with the ideals of both neue sachlichkeit (new objectivity) and the berlin dada group.'.
gay liberation, installed in 1992 in a park in greenwich village, commemorates a historic event that took place across the street in 1969. on june 28th of that year, new york city police raided the stonewall inn, a bar frequented by homosexuals.
in hispanic wedding dress display, newark, new jersey, segal captured the shop window display of a wedding gown. while the impact of photography and photojournalism was always evident in segal\'s sculptures, near the end of his career he became an active photographer.
man at a table depicts a seated, life-sized figure based on the body of the artist himself. the figure, seated alone at an empty table, appears to be waiting for something.
while executed in the well-known plaster cast style segal had established, these figures are painted in vivid monochrome red, yellow, blue, and black. in a radical departure from his "banal subjects" (as he himself put it), and usual matte white figures, segal debuted as a colorist in the mid-1960s.
in this powerful memorial to the victims of the holocaust, segal employs his signature plaster cast style to evoke a concentration camp. segal\'s proposal was the winning submission for a competition for a memorial sculpture in san francisco\'s lincoln park in 1981.
the seemingly infinite passageway between the deceased figure and the viewer, positioned as the living, exemplifies this. however, like many of his other works, the perspective of the work presents the setting as seemingly infinite.
government bureau, like subway, offers a social commentary about the anonymity of modern urban life, but with a different technique.  tooker uses this imagery to display the hypocrisy of the governmental system, which monitors citizens while simultaneously dehumanizing them.'.
tooker\'s sleepers ii depicts a series of homogenous figures, all with blonde hair and blue eyes, lying in a sea-like mound of white blankets. sleepers ii is one of tooker\'s \'private\' works, which displays a more personal, internal narrative than one of social commentary about contemporary urban life.
the painting was inspired by tooker\'s own frustration waiting for building permits, and he says, "the waiting room is a kind of purgatory - people just waiting - waiting to wait. this scene displays a series of people waiting for an unknown service, many of them in numbered stalls, which are identical and narrow.
voice ii, the second of the voice series, shows two almost identical men on opposite sides of what appears to be a door trying to communicate. the figure on the right is struggling to hear the figure on the left, and the figure on the left appears to be characterized by fear.
balustre et crane predicts a series of still lifes braque created called vanitas, in which objects symbolize agony or mental misery.  he painted skulls repeatedly following his return from war and during the onset of world war ii. in these paintings, balustre et crane in particular, braque uses a bright array of colors to represent emotional reactions to the political discomfort he felt about the war.'.
braque depicted both bottles and fishes throughout his entire painting career, and these objects stand as markers to differentiate his various styles. bottle and fishes is an excellent example of braque\'s foray into analytic cubism, while he worked closely with picasso.
the subject matter of this painting commemorates a banquet held in braque\'s honor upon returning from the war.  fruit on a table-cloth with a fruit dish shows a table display flattened out in the pictorial plane as braque had done many times before, but here he replicates the texture of wood and marble, and even shades the fruit.'.
collage helped braque to realize that, "color acts simultaneously with form but has nothing to do with it,". in violin and pipe, he chooses a stringed instrument as his subject matter.
seurat\'s first important canvas, the bathers is his initial attempt at reconciling classicism with modern, quasi-scientific approaches to color and form. the scene\'s intermingling of shades also demonstrates seurat\'s interest in eugene delacroix\'s handling of shades of a single hue.
la seine  la grande-jatte of 1888 shows the artist returning to the site of his most famous painting - a sunday on la grande jatte painted two years prior. this later composition demonstrates seurat\'s continued interest in form and perspective, but reveals a much softer and more relaxed technique than la grande jatte.
but the classicism of the bathers is gone from la grand jatte; instead the scene has a busy energy, and, as critics have often noted, some of the figures are depicted at discordant scales. once again, as in bathers, the scale of the picture is equal to the dimensions and ambition of major salon pictures.
seurat\'s early paintings often feature a remarkable stillness, even with complex figure compositions, but the circus features a scene of dynamic movement, and is typical of his late style. this painting was seurat\'s last, and was left unfinished when he died suddenly in march of 1891.
young woman powdering her face is a portrait of seurat\'s mistress madeleine knobloch. knobloch was a working-class woman with whom seurat maintained a long term secret relationship, keeping her separate not only from his bourgeois family but also from his bohemian friends.
blue ii is indicative of o\'keeffe\'s early monochromatic drawings and watercolors, which evoke the movement of nature through abstract forms.  the intense blue perhaps suggests the sound of the music and the mood it evokes or expresses.'.
she stated that "nobody really sees a flower - really - it is so small - we haven\'t time - and to see takes time... her flower images often received interpretations that o\'keeffe disagreed with, particularly from feminist critics who saw these paintings as veiled illusions to female genitalia.
this painting illustrates o\'keeffe\'s skill in articulating architectural structures as well as her use of the highly realistic, yet simplified style of precisionism. the painting can also be read as a double portrait of steiglitz and o\'keeffe; stieglitz is represented by the scientific american building, as indicated by his name in red, and o\'keeffe by the radiator building.
richter employs a systematic approach to the canvas in his color-chart-based painting 1024 farben (1024 colors). superficially reminiscent of the neo-dadaist, 1950s "hard edge" abstraction of ellsworth kelly, richter chooses here to systematically paint squares of colors based on the predetermined structure of the color wheel.
richter suggests only a shallow space akin to that of a mirror.  one thus appreciates the numerous colors and transitions that occur in this painting, many having been created outside the complete control of the artist much as nature often creates wondrous optical pleasures partly by design, and partly by accident.'.
in 1976, richter first employed the term "abstract painting" as a formal title for many of his works, such as this example. richter did not want to offer a definitive explanation for his abstract work, stating only that he was "letting a thing come, rather than creating it.".
clouds is an example of how richter frequently alternates between realist and abstract styles in various series of work, as well as on a single canvas. thus richter is frequently fascinated by how a viewer\'s desire to extract "meaning" from a given work of art often proves utterly futile.
in this example of one of his early grey paintings, richter allows structure and color to compose the "picture." richter employs thick brushstrokes and monochromatic color, thus sweeping across the canvas in a fluid, entirely fused motion.
ostensibly a painting of his young son, moritz exemplifies richter\'s affinity for striking a tense balance between abstraction and figuration.  moritz is reminiscent of andy warhol\'s combination of appropriated imagery and painted silkscreen techniques; a hazy glow seemingly emanates from the young boy, thus providing a powerful contrast to the material reality of the painted surface.'.
as with other controversies they have managed to provoke, gilbert &amp; george are reluctant to say very much. beardgate is part of gilbert &amp; george\'s recent series, the beard pictures. in this image they depict themselves wearing beards made of barbwire.
coming, a grid of nine black and white photographs, is from the period before the artists\' discovery of color. in coming, the discrepancy between the artists\' oblivious facial expression and their pornographic hand gesture is simultaneously uncanny and hilarious.
drunk with god, part of the believing world series, is one of the very large works that gilbert &amp; george started to make in the early 1980s.  drunk with god mischievously aspires to grandeur by conflating the idea of religious or spiritual suffering with the all-too-human suffering caused by being drunk.'.
yet, disrupting any sense of propriety, cut-out letters announcing george the cunt and gilbert the shit are emblazoned across their chests. the artists whose background was in sculpture, classified most of their early work including george the cunt and gilbert the shit as magazine sculptures.
polish cross consists of 10 identical postcards with the image of the former polish pope, john paul ii, glued in a cross shape against a background of 20 identical postcards of a crown. gilbert &amp; george profess to be monarchists and huge fans of the british crown.
the size of the room is based on the living room of the gallerists that first commissioned the piece. the tuileries installation consists of life-size charcoal drawings of trees lining the walls of a living room, with the same imagery plastered all over the furniture as well.
not to be confused with a 1917 painting simply entitled the melancholy of departure, the present work, gare montparnasse (the melancholy of departure), was dubbed an "architectonic masterpiece" by robert hughes. the clock tower and departing train possibly foreshadow his imminent departure to join the italian army in the first world war.
this is one of a series of "metaphysical interiors" painted by de chirico in the later part of this period, while he was living in ferrara. like other works in the series, it features a room cluttered with a diverse set of objects, including other framed images, and was influenced by his walks through the city\'s arcades.
this is an example of the many self-portraits de chirico painted in the 1920s. it presents him as a visionary (heroic) figure, and is reminiscent of self-portraits by mannerist painters from the 16th century.
the muses are another recurring motif in de chirico\'s paintings. he believed they inspired the artist to see beyond mere appearances and look into the metaphysical - the realm of memory, mythology and truth.
the enigma of an autumn afternoon is the first painting in de chirico\'s metaphysical town square series, and the first painting in which he settled upon the style and imagery for which he is now famous - quiet, enigmatic, strangely simplified scenes of old towns. it is also the first in a number of canvases that he titled with the word "enigma.".
giorgio morandi\'s fiori is a small painting measuring nearly sixteen by twelve inches. the restraint of morandi\'s palette continues in the background, which is divided into two regions of closely-related cream.
one of giorgio morandi\'s earliest paintings, natura morta (still life) of 1914, features a wooden table on which stands an assortment of monochromatic objects of everyday life. morandi\'s still life suggests futurism in the way each object is rendered to suggest movement towards the foreground.
morandi\'s natura morta (still life) (1918) departs from his earlier realism with three unrecognizable objects suspended in a box with a clear front. yet, even when working within this irrational style, morandi depicts the objects in a tightly structured arrangement.
 a widely-read publication, this would have brought morandi\'s work before an international audience, although the recognition did not change his reclusive working habits or his quiet devotion to this basic formula of still life composition.' a pattern is created between the rounded forms of the plate, the bowl, the oranges and the verticality of the cloth and box.
this canvas features a grouping of five items, placed closely together in two tight rows.  the result was a perfect suspension of time, which allowed him to focus on formal relationships in a controlled environment.'.
paesaggio depicts the italian countryside, terrain familiar to morandi from his summer travels to the mountain town of grizzana. it is a simple, undramatic scene that features a dirt road bordered by lush fields and trees of green.
artist peter rockwell said that, "any sculptor who looks at bernini\'s apollo and daphne can only come away astonished." apollo and daphne was completed when bernini was twenty-seven and is similar to his the rape of proserpina as it shows a moment of violence.
this piece was commissioned alongside another bust blessed soul, which portrays a young beautiful woman looking up in blissful joy. this bust was created early in bernini\'s career when the artist was twenty one years old.
her slightly open mouth contributes a great sensuality to the portrait, as it would have been carved from life. in sarah mcphee\'s book, bernini\'s beloved, she writes that the bust "captures the riveting individuality of the sitter.
the cornaro family is also present, their sculptures looking onto the scene from the side creating a further theatrical effect. cardinal federico cornaro commissioned this work for his family chapel.
in this work bernini shows his fascination with depicting scenes in dramatic mid-action, inviting the viewer to witness the piece and become fully absorbed. pluto is shown with a regal crown and scepter while the three-headed dog, cerberus, is behind ensuring no one interferes.
known as blaxploitation, the film and television movement is promoted in the movie poster for the film shaft. parks\' 1971 film shaft introduced a new genre to film that represented black characters as heroes.
park\'s american gothic "captures the essence of activism and humanitarianism in mid-twentieth century america." american gothic is a portrait of ella watson, who symbolizes the american black worker.
this famous portrait of the boxing giant mohamed ali shows him in a moment of intense concentration rather than mid-fight in the ring. he shows ali in a range of activities from him working out, praying, sitting at home, and on an early morning run.
in this series, parks captures the roots of anger and frustration felt by african americans. here he portrays the entire family huddled together behind an office desk, talking to a clerk at the poverty board.
the above photograph is one of many documenting the protests happening throughout the united states. parks took photographs at one of a dozen protests happening in harlem in 1963, from which this image appeared of a marcher holding a protest sign that reads, "we are living in a police state.".
her experiments in this vein set her apart from other abstract expressionists with the exception of willem de kooning and made her work a bridge between the abstract expressionists, neo-dada, and pop artists. though the geography and time period were different, the brides depicted by hartigan are also shown as if for sale.
the subject of this painting, marilyn monroe, suggest affinities to pop art because of the popularity of monroe with pop artists, especially andy warhol. the brushwork is softer than in the works discussed above, but hartigan also includes scratches, stippling, and heavy, dark lines.
in this early painting, completed after she returned from mexico, hartigan works in a typical all-over abstract expressionist style with influences from surrealism.  the dominance of curved, biomorphic forms seems a foreshadowing of her later interest in figuration, while the addition in the lower left of a cutout from a life magazine advertisement for pancakes underscores her interest in everyday life.'.
summer street implies urban action and movement through choppy brushwork, without directly representing it. the playful canvas seems to pay homage to the joys and diversions of the summer months as they are experienced on a busy urban street.
this painting was the first in a series, based on 12 prose poems by hartigan\'s friend frank o\'hara, entitled "oranges: 12 pastorals." this work shows hartigan coming into her own as an artist, combining both painterly brushwork and her burgeoning interest in figurative art.
using his skills in metal work, wood created this chandelier as part of a themed interior design project for the hotel montrose in cedar rapids.  wood\'s numerous patrons for projects such as the iowa corn room hailed from the prosperous business class in cedar rapids and were eager to beautify the city and enhance its cultural life.'.
this communal arrangement went on for weeks, everyone moving from farm to farm until all the wheat was threshed. dinner for threshers depicts wood\'s childhood memory of harvest season.
henry wadsworth longfellow\'s famous poem inspired wood\'s 1931 depiction of paul revere\'s legendary ride through massachusetts towns, warning of the arrival of british troops. the patriotically inspiring poem, lauding revere\'s journey "to every middlesex village and farm, a cry of defiance not of fear," had long inspired wood.
although this frustrated housewife is a sympathetic character in the book, wood pokes fun at her by introducing a minor flaw - her second button is coming undone. louis dispatch to comment that "the novelist and painter have become so well-known for their studies of rural america that such a collaboration seems more than just appropriate.".
she wears a ribbon choker around her exceptionally long neck. the background is bare, except for a table with a rotary dial phone, which echoes the sitter\'s long neck.
despite his move towards modern abstraction, klimt\'s work nonetheless draws on several older sources. of all the many women klimt painted from life, adele bloch-bauer, the wife of the viennese banker and sugar magnate ferdinand bloch-bauer, was one of his favorites, sitting for two portraits and serving as the model for several other paintings, including his famous judith i (1901).
klimt\'s job was to paint three monumental canvases concerning the themes of philosophy, medicine, and jurisprudence, respectively. the overarching theme that was supposed to unify the three university paintings was "the triumph of light over darkness," within which klimt was granted a free hand.
klimt, along with many of his fellow painters and graphic artists, cultivated a keen understanding of the symbolic nature of mythical and allegorical figures and narratives from greece, rome, and other ancient civilizations. barely visible at the left side of the painting, she holds the nude figure of nike, representing victory, arguably the only clear feminine reference in the work.
it is typical of the academic style of klimt\'s early work, and of the influence on him of hans makart. this was an important commission for klimt\'s early career: the vienna city council asked klimt and his partner franz matsch to paint images of the old burgtheater, the city\'s opera house - built in 1741 and slated for demolition after its replacement was finished in 1888 - as a record of the theater\'s existence.
the beethoven frieze forms part of the exhibition-as-gesamtkustwerk, or total artistic environment that the secessionists sought to create. the beethoven frieze, only a detail of which is shown here, was painted by klimt for the 14th secession exhibition in 1902 - arguably the group\'s most famous - dedicated to the eponymous german composer who was a longtime vienna resident.
the kiss is perhaps klimt\'s most popular and clear celebration of sexual love, and probably his most reproduced work. like bloch-bauer i, it is one of the key constituent paintings of klimt\'s "golden phase" lasting roughly from 1903-09, and is often considered a prime example of art nouveau painting.
it is as though caillebotte intentionally eliminated the kind of modeling and contrasts of dark and light that would provide the illusion of the depth. like the other genres with which he engaged, caillebotte managed to imbue his still-life paintings with his own style, one that combined realism and unconventional views.
indeed, as art historian paul wood points out, "throughout the 19th century, the status of the male nude was steadily marginalized in avant-garde art." although it was painted in 1884, man at his bath was not exhibited until 1888 at the exhibition of les xx in brussels and, probably not surprisingly, provoked a shocked public and critical response.
the nude woman seen here resting on the couch has removed her clothing and has tossed it somewhat haphazardly on the end of the couch above her head. ordinarily, the nude female would be depicted looking out toward the viewer in a gesture of sexual or at least sensual engagement.
in fact, the floor scrapers is one of the very first paintings representing the "urban proletariat," according to the muse d\'orsay. those representatives of the artistic establishment considered the subject, common workers refinishing a wood floor, "unheroic" and the strange, tilted view was thought to be too radical.
the alternate title of the painting, snow effect, seems to be the major focus of the painting as the usual precision with which caillebotte creates his modern cityscapes is largely absent, in a way obliterated by the snow. by the opening of the fourth impressionist exhibition in 1879, caillebotte\'s painting career had gained considerable momentum; that year he submitted more than 25 paintings, including this and another roofscape.
this 22 foot long canvas situated in a main room at the musee d\'orsay buries the viewer as if he or she were in a cave. emphasizing the temporal nature of life, courbet intentionally did not let the light in the painting express the eternal.
this is one of the best examples of courbet\'s non-classical treatment of nudes. in this eight foot tall painting two women are partially naked without any mythological justification or rhetoric, rendered naturally and not idealized.
in this large work courbet painted himself meeting alfred bruyas, a key patron and supporter. the painting expresses the collector\'s appreciation of the genius of courbet.
many early modernists were influenced by japanese prints and it is argued that courbet is one of the first to be affected by this eastern aesthetic. likely, taking a cue from the prints, he shows us a slice of water closed off from the view of vast space.
the unclothed semele is prostrated on jupiter\'s lap, as their unborn son bacchus flies away in front of her. if, in compositional terms, this painting represents something like the culmination of a style, in thematic terms jupiter and semele is the definitive expression of moreau\'s complex, synthetic spirituality.
as the creature claws her way up his nude body, oedipus and the sphinx hold each other\'s gaze. moreau\'s father had died a few months before he began the piece, just as oedipus\'s father has died, shortly before the scene depicted.
like oedipus and the sphinx, orpheus depicts two faces, one male and one female, staring down and mirroring one another. orpheus was a legendary musician whose lyre could hypnotise and charm humans, animals, and gods.
is orpheus grieving prior to his journey into the underworld, or after his return, having failed to bring eurydice back? this work, painted in homage to the life of moreau\'s friend, companion and possible lover alexandrine dureux, who died in 1890, depicts the greek poet-hero orpheus grieving at the tomb of his wife eurydice.
wilke created a provocative advertisement to promote her first solo exhibition at ronald feldman fine arts in the early 1970s. the photograph depicts wilke in her studio in chateau marmont, los angeles, wearing a sweater, high-heeled boots, and thin hosiery.
in the late 1980s, wilke began painting abstract watercolor self-portraits that focused on her face, once again, showcasing her wide range of media and her continued interest in autobiography and feminine representation.  she later exhibited these diaristic works as b.c. meaning before consciousness (of her cancer).'.
 she is also cleverly inserting herself into the canon of art that is comprised largely of male artists while subtly interrogating the meanings inherent in large glass.' as with most of her work, wilke\'s performance addresses images of women, here suggesting that both high art and popular culture are implicated in women\'s objectification- that not much has changed over the decades since duchamp\'s the large glass.
in this photo series of thirteen portraits, quite unlike in her earlier photographs, wilke presents herself with a brutal honesty. in 1991 wilke began to document the physical changes caused by her cancer using her typical style of self-portraiture, with the help of goddard.
wilke was one of the first feminist artists to create vaginal forms, something that she did in various media beginning with terra cotta in the 1960s. in the needed-erase-her series, she uses kneaded erasers to make the vaginal forms, using word play to further underscore the feminist bent of her work.
in 1978, wilke was invited to create a series of works for new york\'s p.s.1. in the shots with the gun, wilke\'s slow movements across ten television monitors was captured; these were overlaid with a recording of wilke reading quotations from male politicians, philosophers, and artists.
the chocolate self-portrait was one of several produced by wilke for consumption at an opening reception of a gallery exhibition. wilke\'s interest in self-portrait photography continued in sculptural form in the 1980s with a 3-d series originally done in chocolate and later painted plaster.
cloud shepherd was the first monumental sculpture completed by arp, and one of a number of bronzes generated by the artist in the 1950s.  there is also a delightful contrast here, between the permanence of a material like bronze, and a form as transient as a cloud.'.
 one of the first attempts to engage the element of chance in a work of art, it demonstrates arp\'s commitment to the ideal of chaos, a hallmark of dada.' one of arp\'s earliest "chance collages," this composition demonstrates his signature technique of tearing paper into rough shapes and dropping them onto a larger sheet, and then pasting them where they happened to fall.
here as in sculpture to be lost in the forest, arp began with the form, and titled the work after it was completed. a firm believer in purely abstract art, arp was interested in alluding to forms in nature without actually depicting them.
arp was keenly interested in opposites. in this particular sculpture the contrast between material and emptiness is showcased by the smooth limestone surface, with its elegant line twisted form embracing two gaping voids.
arp usually created his sculptures in plaster, sanding away until he found the satisfying shape, and thought up the titles only when the work was complete. sculpture to be lost in the forest is a prime example of arp\'s ability to balance abstraction with allusion.
one of a series of wooden relief sculptures made by arp in the 1920s, shirt front and fork depicts a recognizable form in an unrecognizable context. rendered in black, grey and white, the work has an overt graphic quality that allows the viewer to quickly identify the shape of a fork on the right side.
the cephalopod motif developed his experiments with the doll in terms of body as manipulated metaphor. bellmer\'s fixation with the octopus-liked cephalopod, marked the start of a motif that would become a dominating theme for the rest of his life.
in many of his doll photographs her face is a blank mask onto which the viewer can project whatever they feel, but here she has character. the inspiration for bellmer\'s first doll was allegedly his unfulfilled sexual desire for his underage cousin ursula naguschewski who was then living with him and his wife.
however, his choice of red for the body suggests violation, while the yellow tinted forest suggests a feeling of sickness. after bellmer shot to fame via the surrealist infatuation with his doll, he created this series of photographs, posing this new doll in over a hundred scenarios.
the last three decades of bellmer\'s life were mainly devoted to producing pornographic works dealing with sadist, erotic, sexual transgressions.  bellmer would himself go on to refer to this vagina-as-eye motif in his drawing of his lover and artistic muse, unica zrn, titled eye vulva (1964).'.
condensation cube is a transparent acrylic box containing a few inches of water. although it is tempting to compare haacke\'s cube with the with works by minimalist artists like donald judd or robert morris, and with the lightheartedness of group zero, condensation cube goes beyond this as it incorporates the water cycle, animating the ready-made object.
haacke\'s germania won the top prize at the 1993 venice biennale, where haacke represented germany. inside, the word germania, hitler\'s proposed new name for berlin, occupied the back wall.
as it is constantly changing grass grows is a work that occurs independently of its audience. grass grows is a work that highlights biological systems, which haacke describes as "a grouping of elements subject to a common plan and purpose that interact so as to arrive at a joint goal.".
while outside the gallery space life goes on might be seen as only a plant, within the exhibition context it becomes an ode to life and a meditation on death. this ambiguity gives life goes on its main legacy.
manhattan real estate holdings is a political work comprising of photographs and photocopied documents displaying slumlord harry shapolsky\'s real estate holdings. shapolsky et al.
the business behind art knows the art of the koch brothers consists of three photographs, two of the newly built plaza in front of the museum and one of a detail of the museum faade with a photoshopped banner which reads: "the business behind art knows the art of good business." like his earlier work metromobiltan, the business behind art knows the art of the koch brothers reveals the ethically questionable link between the metropolitan museum of art and its patrons.
in 1947, hofmann abandoned painting on board and began to use canvas.  he also began to explore a wider variety of styles, and ecstasy reflects his experiments, showing his continued loyalty to european masters such as joan miro and hans arp at a time when many of hofmann\'s american colleagues were trying to overcome european influences.'.
moving from geometric into fluid forms and a more intense color range, the conjurer demonstrates the diversity of hofmann\'s mature style.  he uses density of color and constellations of shapes to evoke psychological and spatial relationships, rather than objective reality.'.
while living in paris between 1904 and 1914, hofmann received much of his education in art and theory from frequent encounters with picasso, matisse and braque, and particularly from a close friendship with robert delaunay.  delaunay\'s work, such as his eiffel tower with trees (which was part of a series devoted to the monument), showed hofmann how he might balance color and form; it even encouraged him to paint his own quasi-cubist still lifes.'.
revisiting one of his earliest inspirations, pointillism, hofmann here uses thick dabs of paint to create the mosaic of polychromatic textures that structures the composition.  the flowers depicted were those grown by his first wife, miz, and the sumptuous blooms that emerge and recede in the picture create a dynamism that makes the color swirl.'.
pictures such as the wind have been at the center of a long controversy over whether hofmann inspired jackson pollock\'s use of the drip technique.  some have claimed that pollock saw pictures like this when he visited hofmann\'s studio in 1942, and that this inspired his first use of poured paint in 1943.it was first thought that this work was produced in 1942, but now, professionals believe, that the wind was produced around 1944, and that it was pollock and hofmann\'s twin interest in the work of andr masson, among others, that led both men to experiment with dripped paint at the same time.'.
in this stunning full-length experimental film the protagonist sees his dreams reflected in his eyes and realizes "if you can look inside yourself, you can look inside anyone!" it features seven dream sequences by fernand lger, alexander calder, marcel duchamp, max ernst, man ray, and richter himself, which explore fantasy and desire, to an innovative score by louis applebaum, paul bowles, and john cage.
lasting only 3 minutes, the film shows squares and rectangles moving across and within the flat plane of the screen in a mesmerizing rhythm. this incredibly influential early abstract animation was the result of richter and his partner viking eggeling\'s foray from the static canvas to a moving one.
this epic 16-foot long scroll-collage records the key turning point of world war ii - the soviet victory in stalingrad. he incorporated the clippings in the scroll under the geometric forms, and- as such the work reads from left to right, including headlines such as "workers battle for stalingrad", "stalingrad blows up its bridges," and ending with the clippings "nazis\' stalingrad chief captured" and "stalingrad free.".
in this short film richter shifted from the abstract animation of rhythmus 21 (1921) to pioneer a dazzling technical skill. richter uses trick shots, overlays, and fast motion to make trees bloom, he uses slow motion to show tea cups crashing to the floor, reverse motion to show water retreating back into a hose.
guimard\'s only religious structure is this jewish house of worship located on the rue pavee in the marais, a traditionally jewish district in the center of paris; as such, it is often known simply as the rue pavee synagogue. it was commissioned by a community of relatively recent immigrant orthodox jews from what is now russia and poland.
often the villas were given pet names by their owners, such as "la bluette," or "la surprise." guimard usually designed them with an exposed wood framework of curved members that was filled in with rusticated millstone.
much of this area at ground level, however, was enclosed in the 1950s, which eliminated this recreational function. the columns themselves use an unusual shape that leaves them open to precise interpretations, thus attracting continual rumination and attention.
guimard donated the dining room suite from the couple\'s house in paris to the city, including the cabinetry and wall panels. it was unusual for the exact same furniture designs to be re-used for different commissions.
guimard was awarded the commission as a favor from the socialist-controlled paris city council, whose political leanings mirrored his own sympathies. as early as 1908, guimard\'s entrances were removed from the champs-elysees because they did not "harmonize" with the classical buildings there.
the topographical features of the landscape often served as inspiration for frankenthaler\'s abstract imagery. with its brilliant red wash filling most of the canvas, canyon reflects the change in frankenthaler\'s artistic practice introduced several years earlier, when she began replacing turpentine-thinned oil with watered-down acrylic poured in larger stains and blots.
with its minimally defined forms and earthy palette, desert pass is an excellent example of the ways frankenthaler responded to the natural landscape.  among them: yellow-gold, evoking sand as well as the desert\'s aridity and intense light and greenish-blue, suggesting the form and color of cacti.'.
an eight-color woodcut, essence mulberry consists of a large bluish gray area containing orange markings, framed by two broad stripes of rich red.  printed by tyler graphics, essence mulberry was the first of frankenthaler\'s many collaborations with the master printer occurring over a roughly twenty-five year period.'.
frankenthaler\'s final collaboration with tyler graphics, madame butterfly is an incredibly complex work, involving 106 colors, 46 woodblocks, and measuring 6\' in length.  with its color washes, floating forms, and watercolor-like effect, madame butterfly is reminiscent of works like mountains and sea - a seeming realization of the soak-stain technique in the medium of woodcut.'.
depicting an open space above a mountain-like divide, savage breeze was frankenthaler\'s first foray into the medium of woodcut.  indeed, savage breeze is far removed from the graphic appearance of the traditional woodblock print, giving the appearance of painted, rather than carved, wood.'.
this film was scripted by writer james agee and shot by helen levitt with the help of friend and fellow artist janice loeb. throughout the film, the adults appear seemingly unaware of the fantastical reality the children have crafted for themselves.
the framing of the image suggests that levitt was on the sidewalk below the children, and its angled composition suggests that levitt took this as she was walking by. in this tension between posed and authentic, levitt\'s eye as a photographer is revealed.
in this image, the boy in the center holds his hand confidently to his chest, fingertips inside his vest.  instead, here, the boys directly engage the viewer, enticing us to wonder exactly what the boy in the center was saying.'.
the new york of 1971 was dramatically different than the new york of the 1940s, when levitt first began photographing. in this image, an african american woman talks to an african american man pushing his hot dog cart, named "house of weenies," down a littered city street.
encompassing both the spontaneity as well as the surrealist elements for which her work was known, this color image explains why levitt was known as "new york\'s visual poet laureate." the brilliant kelly green of the car directly behind the girl and the turquoise beetle create a lyrical balance of color, for which levitt\'s color images were known.
in this well-known image, four girls, walking down a city sidewalk, turn to look at soap bubbles drifting up over the street. because the soap bubbles have no definable source, they are mysterious, and their bright frailty is accentuated against the dark stone expresses the transitory nature of the moment and of childhood itself.
steering away from the stereotype of a female photographer\'s motherly stance towards children, levitt\'s children are neither serene nor innocent. in this photo, two children hold up a broken mirror as others crouch to examine the shards of glass left behind.
a clich in any other hands, this iconic portrait shows elsa peretti, model and later jewellery designer, posing for french vogue in a halston bunny costume on the roof of her apartment building in new york. the backdrop of the metropolis with stacks of windows ascending high rise buildings, hints at the hidden voyeurism present in conservative city life.
this photograph, taken for american vogue in the late 1950s, shows australian super model janice wakely wearing a black top, matching checked woollen skirt and handbag, and goggles around her neck. she is standing, leaning out of an open top car, driving down a city street with an outstretched arm clutching her handbag.
the photograph was part of an eight-page spread in the magazine wearing revillon frres furs under the heading "how to make the fur fly". helmut had a keen eye for beautiful women, and this wasn\'t the first time he had worked with willy van rooy, having previously shot her for french elle and french vogue.
taken in le pen\'s residence in saint-cloud, paris, it is debated whether le pen liked the picture, although le pen had fond memories of the visit; helmut and le pen apparently got on famously. this infamous portrait of jean-marie le pen, former president of fascist political organisation the national front in france, shows le pen at home with his dobermans.
helmut newton took this photograph at the height of second wave feminism for hermes fashion house and a men\'s magazine called adam, published by vogue. hermes was not the only one to be upset by the image, feminists criticized the image for being pornographic and misogynistic.
two women in stockings, underwear, and black patent heels stand in front of a man in a suit, looking back at them. this photograph is from newton\'s private property suites, a portfolio of three suites containing 45 photographs taken between 1972 and 1983, published in 1984.
the x-ray photograph shows a foot in a high heeled shoe by karl lagerfeld and a cartier bracelet. an example of his continuing ability to shock the world of fashion, helmut newton produced a series of "x-ray" images, commissioned by anna wintour for the "high and mighty" spread in vogue\'s issue of february 1995.
it is an important example of newton\'s subversive celebration of independent women; women who have the choice and freedom to live their lives on their own terms.  as art critic lindsay baker put it, "together, newton and saint laurent created a moment in fashion history."'.
birla house, india documents a visibly shocked prime minister of india, jawaharlal nehru, announcing the death of mahatma gandhi to the crowd outside his home. it is a psychological portrait of the photographer and of the nation as a whole in addition to functioning as a visual historical document.
hyres, france is an example of cartier-bresson\'s commitment to a sense of geometry and order. cartier-bresson took hyres while on vacation in the cote d\'azure region.
on the surface, cartier-bresson is depicting a familiar trope from the history of art and, in particular, the recent impressionist movement: people engaged in leisure activities in the parisian countryside. the cascading or layered visual effect of the photograph is echoed in the narrative.
like the surrealist painters, cartier-bresson\'s surrealist photographs are perplexing and, in some cases, disturbing visual games intended to provoke the subconscious mind to make connections that are deeply personal. this photograph, shot during a trip to mexico in 1934, exemplifies the heavy influence of surrealism on cartier-bresson\'s work, an influence that endured, resurfacing at times as late as the 1960s.
this photograph captures a group of children playing in the rubble in seville, spain. cartier-bresson was aware that, if the subjects in the snapshot knew they were being photographed, spontaneity would be compromised.
cartier-bresson captures the chaos of the turbulent transition years of 1948-49 in shanghai. life magazine sent cartier-bresson to china to document the civil war and unrest that accompanied the political transition from the chinese national party, kuomintang, to communist rule under mao zedong and the people\'s liberation army.
jane avril was one of the major starlets on the dance scene in 1880s paris. this lithograph is an advertisement for avril\'s major gig at the jardin de paris.
prostitution was an overarching theme in toulouse-lautrec\'s work. over the course of his career, toulouse-lautrec made over 50 paintings of prostitutes, none of which were exhibited during his lifetime.
this painterly pastel, made well before toulouse-lautrec or his famous sitter were well-known, depicts van gogh seated pensively at a montmartre caf table. toulouse-lautrec and van gogh were friends, bonding over their passion for absinthe (also known as "the green fairy") which they viewed as a gateway to inspiration, and as both struggled with intense bouts of alcoholism.
in this remarkable painting, two women lie gazing at one another, their cheeks flushed with the glow of intimacy. toulouse-lautrec frequented the houses of prostitution in paris, and he admired the unguardedness of the women: "who stretch themselves out on the divans...entirely without pretensions.".
one of a series of portraits of carmen gaudin done by toulouse-lautrec during his paris years, the laundress is meant to expose the raw, somber and gritty world of the working-class. toulouse-lautrec poses the prostitute - one of his favorite models - as a laundress, taking a break from her physically intensive and exhausting work.
matisse regarded this picture as one of the most important in his career, and it is certainly one of his most puzzling.  the painting might be compared to the backs series (1909-31), which also preoccupied matisse the years he was working on bathers, since both address the problem of depicting a three-dimensional figure against a flat background.'.
matisse completed a series of four blue nudes in 1952, each in his favorite pose of entwined legs and raised arm.  he then created a figure that is abstracted and simplified, a symbol for the nude, before incorporating the nude into his large-scale murals.'.
during his fauve years matisse often painted landscapes in the south of france during the summer and worked up ideas developed there into larger compositions upon his return to paris.  critics noted its new style -- broad fields of color and linear figures, a clear rejection of paul signac\'s celebrated pointillism.'.
the title of this painting is taken from the refrain of charles baudelaire\'s poem, invitation to a voyage (1857), in which a man invites his lover to travel with him to paradise. the landscape is likely based on the view from paul signac\'s house in saint-tropez, where matisse was vacationing.
but in the back series, matisse suggested that the backdrop was fashioned from the same heavy material as the figure itself.  the motif was possibly first inspired by a figure in a painting by czanne that matisse owned.'.
matisse planned this picture as early as 1913, and it recalls visits made to morocco around this time. like bathers by a river (1917), the moroccans was significantly influenced by picasso\'s cubism, and some have even compared it to picasso\'s three musicians (1921).
matisse attacked conventional portraiture with this image of his wife. amelie\'s pose and dress are typical for the day, but matisse roughly applied brilliant color across her face, hat, dress, and even the background.
 rousseau proudly responded in turn, "i am the inventor of the portrait landscape, as the press has pointed out."' rousseau\'s ambitions to become a noted academic painter are also evoked in the subtitle of this work, which announces a new hybrid genre - the "portrait-landscape.".
in this, rousseau\'s first jungle painting, a wide-eyed, tooth-bearing tiger suddenly emerges from the grass, where it has been lurking, with the waving fronds, slanting branches, rain, and dark sky indicating the storm cited in the title.  vallotton\'s description suggests the reasons rousseau would be so highly acclaimed among modern artists of the early-20th century and later.'.
with its reference to an antelope "shedding a tear," the caption that accompanied the work reveals rousseau\'s lack of firsthand experience of his wild animal subjects: "the hungry lion, throwing himself upon the antelope, devours him. the lion and antelope at the center of the painting wear vacant stares that contribute to a surprisingly static attack scene, much of which is taken up by lush trees before a setting sun.
this painting\'s departure from rousseau\'s usual subject matter led many to declare it a forgery, some even attributing it to andr derain. for its eerie, meditative beauty and image of humankind\'s harmony with the animal kingdom, the sleeping gypsy has attained iconic status.
this painting was commissioned by robert delaunay\'s mother, berthe, comtesse de delaunay. rousseau supposedly decided on the subject for this painting after hearing her stories about her experiences in india.
it has been suggested that the influence for this piece may have come from non-western art, in particular from friction drums made on the oceanic island of new ireland.  the strings serve to emphasize the space around the figure, even though our eye can still see through them to the hard mass of the sculpture\'s body.'.
this is the first of moore\'s sculptures to feature the idea of internal and external forms. not until the end of the 1940s did he return to the idea, but it became important to him, providing another means to pose the contrast between hard and soft that his sculptures often suggest.
this was the first figure moore sculpted in brown hornton stone, and it was heavily influenced by an aztec sculpture, the chacmool figure, of which he saw a cast in a paris museum.  the figure is also one of the earliest instances of moore\'s use of the reclining figure, a motif that would be central to his mature style.'.
the commission to produce a sculpture for the headquarters of unesco, in paris, was moore\'s first major international commission for public art. originally commissioned by unesco to create a bronze sculpture, moore felt the dark material would have rendered the piece ineffective against the building\'s glass background.
 the war artists committee later purchased a number of larger drawings from moore, including tube shelter perspective, and distributed them to galleries around england to help boost morale.' when i first saw it...i saw hundreds of henry moore figures stretched along the platform.".
the grisaille depicts the mass of saint gregory, a historical narrative of pope gregory, also known as gregory the great. in conjunction with this traditional narrative stands an unknown naked man at the entrance of the hut, who looks out onto mary.
the garden of earthly delights is considered boschs seminal masterpiece and the most successful and outstanding of his creations. as with most of boschs work, there are multiple interpretations, the first of which was conducted in 1605 by jos de siguenza.
the haywain triptych is one of eight that is still intact (out of boschs 16 total triptychs). the central panel depicts a large haywain (or hay wagon), around which people fight and struggle violently to get their hands on some of the hay.
in the central panel, jesus sits in heaven surrounded by angels observing the earthly events occuring below, already rife with destruction and sin. the left panel portays god, sitting in the clouds, with angels being cast down to earth as insects, amidst a paradise in its infancy.
this is yet another of boschs works co-opted by leonora carrington in 1947 as inspiration for her own the temptation of st. the landscape, although less intricate and complicated than in other of boschs works, features various elements that enhance the narrative.
fittingly as the final pieces for the paintings of the temple, af klint produced three large altarpieces. for af klint, these were instinctively produced works that possessed spiritual messages in need of decoding.
 the evolution works acknowledge beyond doubt that af klint focused on art, science, and religion simultaneously.' the woman is dressed in af klint\'s signature female yellow, whilst the man has appropriately blue robes.
likely inspired by af klint\'s botanical studies, the large yellow form is reminiscent of a bloom emerging from a bulb. each painting in af klint\'s series, ten in total completed in four months, illustrate the different phases of human life including childhood, youth, maturity, and old age.
chaos no.7 is one of 26 works that make up the first series of the larger paintings for the temple cycle, entitled primordial chaos. af klint records in one of her notebooks that both the snail and the spiral represent for her development or evolution.
 interpreted as a self-portrait of af klint, the warrior now peacefully confronts gender inequalities that had previously induced anger in the swan series.' the dove series is the most intimate and tender of all of the series that comprise the larger body of paintings for the temple.
the redness encircles the two birds and furthermore, drips like blood from the black, \'female\' bird\'s wing. in the spirit of ancient chinese symbolism, the image reveals how seemingly contrary forces are in fact complementary.
indeed, af klint became interested in all world religions. from there, the areas colored black and white change according to which spiritual outlook af klint is exploring.
color of shadows, 1015, depicts a white corridor leading to a white wall, with only the hint of wooden floorboards at the lower edge of the frame disrupting the ascetic space.  the value of color of shadows, 1015 is dependent upon the viewer\'s intuitive appreciation of subtle gradations of tone and color and, in this, can be considered as a commentary on the way in which we are emotionally moved by the elements that sustain earth, including light.'.
ligurian sea, saviore shows water and air bisected by the horizon, captured in black and white in a long exposure. in ligurian sea, saviore, the sea and sky appear indistinct, as if enveloped in fog, with only close scrutiny revealing the darker grey of the horizon line and a hint of the ripples of the water in the foreground.
polar bear is amongst the earliest images in sugimoto\'s dioramas series (1976 - 2012), most of which were taken at the american museum of natural history in new york.  sugimoto has continued exploring the concepts central to the dioramas series in other works, including portraits (1999 - present), which takes another 19th-century technology, the wax figure, as a subject.'.
 thus, polarized color is an exploration of the tension between hard-headed science and the poetic ideals of the age of romanticism.' polarized color 048, one of fifty images in the polarized color series (2010), is a small square of intensely concentrated color; moving from a deep blue at the top of the frame through a bright aquamarine at the vertical midpoint into a succession of greens tinged with yellow toward the image\'s base.
like all of hodgkin\'s mature work, this painting lies somewhere between representation and abstraction.  it gave his work a very personal appearance, and grantchester road is a marked and highly successful instance of hodgkin\'s "desperate improvising".'.
the title, indian subject (blue), indicates that the picture was painted in india, which hodgkin had first visited in 1964, just a year before starting this work. the panel support was significant because it later permitted him to make more gestural applications of the paintbrush.
this painting offers a playful exposition of the idea of incompleteness: at first, it even seems that the painting may be unfinished, as so much of the panel remains untreated. as with much of hodgkin\'s earlier work, however, the work also seems to allude to subject-matter beyond the picture-surface.
 works such as put out more flags might indicate the important and original contribution that hodgkin made to twentieth-century printmaking in britain.' this work shows the sophisticated printmaking procedure that hodgkin had developed by the later stage of his career.
either way, what is unique about sound poetry is its emphasis on the nonsensical, on refusing rather than reinforcing meaning. by its nature, a sound poem is meant to be performed rather than simply read silently.
german painter, hans richter, described the nightclub very imaginatively, writing: "the cabaret voltaire was a six-piece band. other founding members of the original zurich group were tristan tzara, richard huelsenbeck, marcel janco, sophie tauber, and hans arp.
 the morphology of banquet and the morphology of coral, like other crystalline structures found in nature may appear similar.' banquet exemplifies lassaw\'s use of a technique he developed in which molten metal is built up by fusing globs of metal together, similar to the accretion of stalagmites.
in 1951, after making his first sale, lassaw was at last able to buy oxyacetylene welding equipment to create sculptures in metal.  the title, kwannon is the japanese name for the buddhist goddess of mercy and compassion.'.
although this was not the most perfect material for sculpture, milky way still stands strong sixty-six years after it was created. milky way is notable for signaling a new direction in lassaw\'s mature open space style.
after experimenting with plaster, rubber and wire, lassaw began working with steel, which became a frequent medium for the artist, along with other metals. sculpture in steel, composed of biomorphic forms, reflects the important influence surrealists such as alberto giacometti and joan mir had on lassaw.
 here, as in many of his works, lassaw combined geometric and biomorphic shapes, drawing the viewer\'s eye into the maze-like composition.' the forms created by empty space in vortex f are as important, if not more important, than the lines themselves.
in black &amp; white cover (the first black and white cover for vogue since 1932) penn used a discarded theater curtain to erase the environment for the figure. dressed by christian dior, fashion model jean patchett strikes an enigmatic pose akin to modern dance or pantomime.
penn experimented with photographic and printing processes throughout his career. cigarette no. 37 is part of a series of cigarette butts shot at close range using a macro lens in the 1970s.
evidence of this appears in his very first vogue cover, the first of more than 150 over the course of his career. "the photographic process for me, is primarily simplification and elimination" penn once said.
penn took multiple photographs of his wife, lisa fonssagrives (a supermodel before the term existed) on the couple\'s trip to morocco in 1951. fonssagrives\'s come-hither pose recalls the odalisque (the exotic harem woman who appears in the work of ingres, delacroix, and matisse).
nude no 150 depicts the lower half of a female body shaped differently from the ideal that appears in penn\'s fashion shoots. earthly bodies presents us with an antidote to these "heavenly" bodies penn was obliged to photograph on a daily basis, resisting this ideal.
before penn, art photography and commercial photography were two distinctly different fields. like his fall fashion cover of 1943, the subject is essentially a pretext for a meditation on color and form.
this masterful, claustrophobic portrait of truman capote is one of the so-called "corner portraits" that formed the basis for penn\'s emerging reputation as a fine art photographer. few, if any, precedents for this pose exist in the history of portraiture.
taken from below, this photograph showcases the profile of fashion model evelyn tripp. this trademark device of zeroing in on one detail - in this case the veil - and letting the focus soften behind it was one of penn\'s trademark moves.
happy reunion focuses on a group of eleven women sitting in a living room, who laugh and converse with each other. happy reunion is a central image of oliver\'s iconic series the woman (1970-73), which examines different aspects of femininity in franco\'s spain.
oliver positions her self-portrait in contrast her work happy reunion taken from a popular magazine. both images of artist and middle-class women are in the same black and white tones, suggesting they were produced for the same mass media.
the family, another work from the woman series, explores how women are defined by family life. the family portrait is obstructed by a brightly colored game board placed over the entire image.
in the 1940s, noguchi produced his first illuminated sculptures, lunars, having previously explored the idea of sculpting with light.  for noguchi, light was another type of medium in which to work, one that challenged the idea of materiality through its fundamental ethereality, and which radiated both the natural and industrial worlds.'.
noguchi started his void series in italy, but he carved the largest, energy void of 1971, at his studio on the island of shikoku, japan. here, in energy void, noguchi worked with black swedish granite on a large scale (approximately 6 feet high), having built his studio around the work.
 the work\'s adaption of abstraction is without precedent in mexican modern art, and was derived more from noguchi\'s intimate familiarity with european modernism.' the work\'s intention was to inspire the dispossessed of mexico to join in the revolutionary cause.
noguchi first encountered japanese gardens during his visits to his father\'s birth land in the 1930s. by the 1950s he began to design his own unique gardens.
in the 1940s, noguchi made a series of interlocking slab sculptures, drawing on surrealist-inspired biomorphic forms, organic abstractions, traditional japanese art, and brancusi\'s simplified figuration. biomorphism appeared in much of noguchi\'s work - both in free-standing sculptures and furniture designs.
during the 1920s and 1930s, noguchi\'s primary means of financial support came from sculpting portrait busts. at this point he had already studied with brancusi and had begun to make his own abstract sculptures, many of which merged geometric and organic forms.
noguchi worked with stone his entire life, first learning how to carve while an assistant to constantin brancusi.  noguchi sensually combines natural elements, creating a work that is both contemplative, but joyous.'.
this work is the second of two of the same name, the first alcove having been created in 1946. an undefined writhing form comprised of nodular patches of blue, green, and yellow floats in the center of alcove ii encased in an abstract hidden cavern of various shades of red and pink.
according to richard shillitoe, "it is colquhoun\'s earliest double image, and combines the pitcher-plant with male genitalia." by 1936, colquhoun has left any obvious human figure behind and ponders the universal macrocosm by focusing on the microcosm that is flowers and plants.
in an early canvas by ithell colquhoun, song of songs, two naked lovers are locked in a carnival embrace. two naked lovers embrace in voluptuous luxury.".
the work is one of a series of seventy-seven works that the artist designed for a pack of tarot cards and features an orange abstract form set against a bright blue background. like the swedish artist hilma af klint, she firmly believed that color and shape was infused with variant meaning.
as referenced in the title, colquhoun\'s painting the pine family consists of three felled trunks lying on the grass with blue sky above them. in colquhoun\'s painting, however, the magical child has been mutilated.
as reflected in the title, at first glance the subject of tree anatomy is a cross section of the lined innards of a tree. specifically, it features a section of tree trunk where a large knot has formed an open space that leads the viewer\'s eye into a dark void.
repin, however, represented a growing social conscience among some russian artists. contrasting repin\'s famous painting barge haulers on the volga (1870-73) with descent of noah from ararat reveals not only their temperamental differences but also why aivazovsky\'s work represented a conservativism that repin and others actively opposed.
aivazovsky\'s technique was undoubtedly shaped early on by tanneur\'s and the latter\'s steamer off dover resembles the black sea in its foregrounding of rolling waves with spume-fringed crests. but tanneur\'s water is always more like gricault\'s, sculpted and frozen in time.
the title refers to a traditional nautical belief that the ninth wave is the last, largest and most deadly wave in a series, at which point the cycle begins again. painted when aivazovsky was 33 years old, it is characteristic of his mature romanticism in technique, theme and populist appeal.
 such moments of startled feeling are perhaps what newmarch meant by a "truthful vision" in aivazovsky\'s best work.' woolf\'s contemporary, the writer rosa newmarch, traveled extensively in russia, immersed herself in its art and culture, and wrote of aivazovsky\'s "truthful vision" in paintings such as the rainbow.
the abstract composition is divided into three horizontal areas and nearly bisected down the middle. long brushstrokes of orange, red, pink, black, and white subvert the geometric structure underlying the composition and create a dynamic tension.
yellow strokes dominate the central area of the canvas in house of the sun. tworkov began a series of paintings based on drawings he had made while teaching at black mountain college in the summer of 1952, and they harkened back to a subject tworkov had often evoked: the greek classic the odyssey.
moving away from large gestural brushstrokes, tworkov embraced systematic composition making, creating works like knight series #3, which looks so different from his abstract expressionist work and yet evokes similar compositional tensions. based on following the moves of the knight around a chessboard under certain parameters, tworkov created a composition of overlapping squares, rectangles, and triangular forms.
the indistinct background consists of grays and ochres and gives no clue as to the setting. in this figure study, tworkov depicts his wife, wally.
by the early 1960s, tworkov had abandoned his more figurative abstractions and fully embraced gestural abstractions, creating large-scale works like west 23rd. the tan strip towards the bottom acts as a unifying ground for all of the vertical strokes across the divided canvas.
blue poles, or number 11, 1952, contains shoe and footprints and even shards of glass embedded in canvas - telling traces of pollock\'s vigorous working methods and turbulent life. during the period he painted blue poles he was drinking in binges, though krasner has stated that the painting took a great deal of time and was not the spontaneous result of a drunken fury.
full fathom five was among the first drip paintings pollock completed.  he even updated impressionism, creating pictures that seem to glitter with the effects of light, and yet which also suggest the pitch dark and anxious interior of the human mind.'.
guardians of the secret, often interpreted as a metaphor for the emergence of unconscious impulses into conscious thought, represents a synthesis of pollock\'s sources. they flank the sides, while along the bottom is a dog reminiscent of anubis, the jackal-god of the ancient egyptian underworld.
mural is an early tour de force in pollock\'s career, a transition between his easel paintings and his signature drip canvases. although influenced by his earlier work in this format, pollock struggled to control the composition.
the 1950s saw considerable changes in both pollock\'s work and personal life. the deep evokes a chasm - an abyss either to be avoided or to get lost inside.
made during a period when he was concentrating on black and white pictures, yellow islands likely began as a purely black canvas. yellow islands was produced in one of pollock\'s last productive years of painting.
 in this example of vicious anti-semitic propaganda, epstein was accused of turning to "primitive, neanderthalic art".' carved in marble, genesis portrays a heavily pregnant woman with exaggerated thighs, hands and stomach, with a face reminiscent of an african mask.
the risen christ is one of his most controversial bronzes, because of the lack of either christian or jewish iconography. in his friend\'s suffering, epstein recognized the suffering of christ.
an example of an early readymade, the rock drill consists of a plaster figure mounted on a miner\'s rock drill. in the sculptor speaks, epstein observes: "the rock drill is not entirely abstract.
in his later life, lawrence often returned to a theme which had interested him since the 1940s: builders.  with fewer color tonalities, looser figural definitions, and less attention to clearly-demarcated boundaries between foreground and background space, lawrence\'s late career builders paintings displayed a greater compositional freedom.'.
 the red flower symbolizes hope, and its appearance in frederick douglass panels suggests the promise of a better life, even in the most dire of circumstances.' panel 28 uses simplified forms, a limited color palette, and a clear narrative progression from left to right in tandem with evocative, descriptive text.
in panel 22, lawrence used an interplay between linear design and unmodulated color planes to suggest the indignities of black imprisonment in the pre-migration-era american south. lawrence\'s most famous narrative series, his 60-panel the migration of the negro, perfected his signature combination of historical storytelling and abstracted style.
two rebels depicts two black men forcibly arrested and escorted to jail by four white police officers. in may of 1963, demonstrations against segregation in birmingham, alabama turned violent, and lawrence captured the mood in a surreal, exaggerated composition.
in victory, lawrence uses a single figure, crafted from a minimal assemblage of burnt orange, brown, yellow, and green color blocks, to illustrate the moral ambiguity of wartime. having experienced the second world war in the u.s. coast guard, lawrence wanted the emotions experienced by both soldier and civilian.
however, lipchitz\' pregnant woman remains in its plaster stage and has been treated as a finished work. lipchitz received a thorough education in traditional sculptural processes, from drawing classical works to mocking up compositions in clay, to creating full plaster models.
however, in prometheus strangling the vulture, lipchitz depicts the titan breaking free of his chains and wrestling the bird that has caused him so much pain. prometheus strangling the vulture is installed near the entrance to the museum.
one of the fruits of this labor was seated man, which is a highly emotive work. by the mid-1920s, lipchitz had moved away from the cubist style that had characterized his work for two decades.
seated man with a guitar is one of lipchitz\' most mature cubist works.  this creative use of the space surrounding the sculpture is a key feature of lipchitz\' sculptural work.'.
lipchitz originally titled this work the couple, but he later chose to rename it the cry. the cry (the couple) depicts two serpentine figures locked in an erotic embrace.
it is, however, deeply emblematic of the complexity of the prayer ritual itself and functions both as the manifestation of a prayer for holocaust victims and of lipchitz\' own process of praying through sculpting. sculpted in the midst of the second world war, the prayer served as a direct expression of lipchitz\' horror upon learning of the nazi\'s concentration camps.
mars disarmed by venus and the three graces was david\'s last painting, one he intended to be a final statement about his oeuvre. venus, goddess of love crowns the god of war, mars, her hand perched suggestively on his thigh.
to mark the first anniversary of the tennis court oath, a moment of solidarity that sparked the revolution, david began an ambitious project. the tennis court oath was no longer a celebrated moment of revolutionary history and plans for its commemoration were forgotten.
wanting to recreate charlemagne\'s coronation as holy roman emperor, the presence of the pope was requested. instead, david chose the less controversial moment when napoleon crowned his wife, josephine, in front of a crowd of dignitaries in notre dame cathedral.
once more turning to contemporary politics, david was commissioned to create a memorial to jean-paul marat following his 1793 assassination by charlotte corday. although the revolutionary government had outlawed religion, david created a visual analogy between marat and images of the dead christ.
painted during the waning years of the revolution, david\'s the intervention of the sabine women suggests the nation\'s fatigue and a growing desire for peace. coming after years of conflict, following the roman abduction of these women, it represents a complicated scene with multiple loyalties in play.
the circuit connecting these three main actors: brutus, his wife, and his dead son, is a tight circle, creating through light and gesture. one of david\'s paintings, a portrait of a known jacobist, was refused, as was this charged depiction of brutus.
these roman horatii brothers were to battle against three curatii brothers from alba to settle a territorial dispute between their city-states. the oath of the horatii depicts narrative from early roman history.
measuring less than a foot in height and width, little venice (1880) is one of more than fifty etchings whistler created depicting the city during his fourteen month stay in italy, in 1879. little venice, which appeared as part of a series of etchings collectively titled "first venice set" in the fine art society\'s exhibition in london in 1880, helped whistler rebuild his reputation following the ruskin libel suit.
masks confronting death exemplifies ensor\'s usage of masks to reveal the underside of society. while ensor\'s masks are more mocking in nature, primitive masks were noted in works by gauguin, derain, and picasso.
portrait of the painter in a flowered hat represents ensor in a three-quarter view, openly confronting the viewer\'s gaze. this portrait recalls the flemish painter peter paul rubens\' self-portrait with hat, (1623-25).
in this particular work ensor represents himself as a pickled herring being torn apart by their hateful criticism. this painting depicts two skeletal figures fighting over a pickled herring in an amorphous landscape with pastel sky.
ensor\'s painting represents anthony the great of egypt (c. 251-356) resisting the temptations of the devil. representing saint anthony\'s battle with the devil may have been ensor\'s response to the temptations and ethical concerns of modern society.
ensor represents a whimsical scene filled with expressive, arabesque lines and pastel colors. this work represents edgar allan poe\'s short story, the vengeance of hop frog (1845) wherein the title character, a court-jester, is the victim of social and class injustice inflicted by the king and clergy.
the most ambitious of rosenquist\'s collage paintings, f-111 stretches 86 feet long across 23 canvas panels and aluminum sections, encompassing a viewer\'s entire field of vision. the painting depicts a full-scale, 73 foot long f-111 fighter plane interrupted by assorted images derived from billboards and advertisements of the day rendered large and in clashing, day-glo colors.
highly dynamic, the painting appears to depict a moment frozen in time, just before the grocery items fall out of the upside-down bag. in this painting, rosenquist utilizes tropes from the visual rhetoric of advertising to create a triptych that features a bag of groceries, a glowing bucket, and cosmetics.
like many pop artists, rosenquist was fascinated by the popularization of political and cultural figures in mass media. considered the artist\'s breakthrough work, president elect speaks to rosenquist\'s fascination with subliminal persuasion through advertising.
the seemingly chaotic composition is part of the speed of light series, which explores vision in motion. inspired by albert einstein\'s theory of relativity and the speed of light, stowaway addresses how people see and understand the same image differently.
 but the artist, now a father, communicates that paternal worry more overtly in gift wrapped doll.' indeed, rosenquist\'s painting was inspired in large part by his own experience as a father raising his then young daughter lily.
brightly colored forms, astronomical imagery, and distinctive logos from advertisements and commercial package designs become distorted as they swirl around vortices in the swimmer in the econo-mist (painting i). the reappearance in this painting of images from his earlier work attests to that.
the experience of being engulfed in a sea of color, programmed to shift from hue to hue, created a sense of motion, like swimming in light. in this way, turrell\'s work is part of a broader shift in art, away from the expression of the artist\'s consciousness (as in abstract expressionism) and towards the viewer\'s experience.
the light causes one to lose all sense of depth, and even to question whether one\'s eyes are open or closed as the light appears bright even through closed lids. turrell\'s perceptual cells series are enclosed, autonomous spheres built to expand an individual\'s perception of space through the use of light.
here, artificial orange light and natural light mingle, guiding the senses and suggesting the color of the sky. the objective is to join inside with outside, eliminating the ceiling, and connecting the individual directly with the sky.
rising out of the vast desert outside flagstaff, roden crater is the site of turrell\'s most ambitious project to date. upon arriving at the extinct volcano, one makes one\'s way through a long tunnel into the crater bowl, a natural concavity 5,500 above sea level.
smith continues "jan van eyck added his motto to only a few of his paintings, one of which is a portrait of his wife. not only was van eyck\'s portraiture highly detailed, but he also innovated a posture now taken for granted, the three-quarter view.
most striking, perhaps, is van eyck\'s careful attention to the nuance of flesh tones of the man\'s hands and facial features, including the light beard of one or two days\' growth, a reoccurring feature in van eyck\'s early male portraits. this minuteness of detail and unusually fine differentiation between the qualities of texture and atmospheric light made jan\'s work impossible to imitate.
saint barbara is a late work by jan van eyck, and quite unusual among his known pieces. saint barbara is posed reading with a palm branch in her left hand to symbolize her triumph over death.
this painting is among the earliest in northern renaissance art depicting the life of saint francis of assisi. jan van eyck is known as an innovator of veristic realism, not only for his meticulous portraiture but also for his stunning panoramic landscapes that appear to recede far into the distance.
additionally, after nearly 400 years of being the assumed masterpiece of jan van eyck, a discovery in 1823 cast doubts on this attribution. the combination of infinite detail and epic scale in the ghent altarpiece marks an extraordinary achievement by the van eycks.
jan van eyck produced numerous religious paintings throughout his career. as erwin panofsky noted, "in jan van eyck, then, all meaning has assumed the shape of reality; or, to put in the other way, all reality is saturated with meaning.".
harbison explains, "van eyck did not portray earthly reality per se: he was not interested in simply recording what he saw. he writes, "van eyck uses visible reality to suit his ends.
johns created this expansive, seven by 16 foot painting by joining several canvases together, as well as by adding various found objects to the painted panels.  this shift in focus illustrated johns\' belief that we all experience the world through multiple fragments viewed in shifting contexts from varying perspectives.'.
by incorporating language into his visual repertoire, johns expanded his dialogue with viewers to encompass the function of visual and verbal symbols. by focusing on colors and the words that represent them, johns abstracted each, removing the traditional associations that accompanied them.
johns referred to his paintings as "facts" and did not provide predetermined interpretations of his work; when critics asked johns if the work was a painted flag, or a flag painting, he said it was both. johns was one of the first artists to present viewers with the dichotomies embedded in the american flag.
in this bronze sculpture, johns intentionally blurs the line between the actual object and its artistic recreation, wherein the handcrafted appearance of the ballantine ale cans is only apparent after close inspection. johns cast one can with an open top and painted the ballantine insignia and the word florida on its top.
the artist\'s hand is a recurring form in a series of works, including periscope (hart crane), that johns executed from 1962 through 1963 and that focus on hart crane, whose poetry resonated deeply with johns. here johns combined several of the motifs and symbols from his earlier paintings in a constrained palette of gray, black, and white.
however, johns excluded the model\'s eyes from the plaster faces, and thus thwarted any exchange of gazes between the viewer and the faces in the work. this forced the viewer to examine the interactions between the painted target and the plaster faces.
the painting apartment houses, paris focuses on urban life.  here dubuffet satirizes conventional, sentimental images of paris, suggesting instead that the jollity of the city\'s inhabitants is forced and false.'.
this picture is typical of the hautes pates series that dubuffet exhibited to huge controversy in 1946. a thick, monochromatic surface serves as the ground for the crudely depicted figure, which is a parody of portraiture.
soul of the underground exemplifies dubuffet\'s fascination with texture and his departure from representational painting. here dubuffet completely abandons pictorial representation in order to evoke sheer matter and sheer unprocessed material.
 going a step further, dubuffet suggests how "cultural" and "savage" approaches to art together work to reaffirm civilization as a whole.' dubuffet\'s heady experience in the country and rejection of art education is evident in this painting.
tinguely encountered his work first in paris and was delighted to exhibit alongside him at the galerie denise rene in 1955. cascade features an array of found objects that slowly rotate around one another.
  a "fragment" of the original sculpture exists in the permanent collection of the moma.' on march 18, 1960, tinguely unveiled what would later be considered his most famous work in the sculpture garden of the museum of modern art in new york.
tinguely\'s metamatic, no. 17 altered the already challenging nature of his earlier metamechanical works by introducing a product directly affected by the spectator. metamatic, no. 17 was created especially for the 1959 paris biennale.
the artist\'s development of this field, otherwise known as kinetic art, is exemplified by metamechanical sculpture with tripod. tinguely used the term "metamechanics" to describe how he set his assemblage sculptures into motion with some form of motor or system of mechanics.
in tinguely\'s santana bascule a thick, flat black wooden wheel attached at a point to a thin semi-circular metal piece take center stage.  like his other mechanized assemblages this one again serves as commentary on the debate regarding the effects of mechanization on modern society.'.
devoted to the composer\'s musical compositions, this fountain praises the achievements of creativity outside of mechanization. the artistic cooperation between jean tinguely and niki de saint phalle resulted in some of the most intriguing artworks of the modernist movement.
within the long tradition of the female nude, ingres\'s version demonstrates both his academic training and his penchant for experimentation.  the group recreated the piece in 2011 with an equally damning set of statistics, again using ingres\'s nude by way of illustration.'.
perhaps now the most iconic portrait of emperor napolon i, ingres\'s painting was originally dismissed as overly gothic, archaic, and even "barbaric." coupled with these art historical references, the presentation of napoleon\'s body and accessories underscores his power.
it subtly foreshadows oedipus\'s tragic fate, namely, his marriage to his mother jocasta and eventual death. here we see the tragic hero oedipus confronted with the riddle of the sphinx.
ingres\'s portrait was disparaged as overtly opportunistic and self-congratulatory, and was widely received as representative of the new, bourgeois era.  the painter edouard manet went so far as to describe portrait of monsieur bertin as the "buddha of the self-satisfied, well-to-do, triumphant bourgeoisie."'.
the turkish bath both summarizes ingres\'s treatment of the female nude and extends his legacy into the modern era.  ingres\'s painting also inspired the many odalisques and female nudes of the fauve artist henri matisse.'.
the narrative required ingres to carefully balance the composition between the earthly realm of louis xiii and the heavenly sphere above. the scene commemorates an iconic moment from the reign of king louis xiii from 1638, when he pledged the dedication of france to the virgin mary.
this tranquil landscape painting depicts the forest of fontainebleau in central france, complete with bovine inhabitants, and a distant cowherd leading his charges to water. nonetheless, this is an important painting in indicating, both in theme and style, corot\'s engagement with the school of painting then associated with fontainebleau.
displayed at the salon of 1835, hagar in the wilderness was praised for its originality and display of technical skill, earning corot instant fame and wealth. in this painting from 1835, corot depicts a scene from the old testament\'s book of genesis.
though he is most readily associated with the emergence of landscape painting, corot also produced beautiful figure paintings and portraits, particularly towards the end of his life. like many of corot\'s portraits, this piece is also characterized by bold color contrasts, making it markedly different from his later landscapes, with their soft tonal palettes.
carefully composed with purposeful asymmetry, this painting partly demonstrates corot\'s continued affinity with the compositional tropes of neoclassical landscape painting, even during the final decades of his career. he exhibited nearly thirty "souvenir" paintings between 1855 and 1874, most of them conveying the same, gentle ambience as this piece.
exhibited at the salon of 1827, the bridge at narni was one of corot\'s early successes, while his technique of painting on location would become a hallmark of his practice. for any european painter of the early nineteenth century, the italian landscape held an almost mystical appeal, having been immortalized by neoclassical painters such as nicolas poussin and claude lorrain.
flexible features two of basquiat\'s most famous motifs: the griot and the venerable crown. a sole black figure, half cadaver, half living entity, stares "blindly" at the viewer, its arms creating a closed circuit, perhaps a reference to spiritualized energy.
citing artistic differences, al diaz and basquiat chose to sever their artistic collaboration, samo, with this three-word announcement. carried out episodically at various cites as a piece of ephemeral graffiti art, the phrase surfaced repeatedly on gritty buildings throughout lower manhattan.
ten punching bags (last supper) is a collaboration between basquiat and andy warhol, once commissioned by alexandre iolas, the international art gallerist and collector.  opposite the renaissance masterpiece, ten punching bags was to function, somewhat playfully, as a "call to arms" for contemporary art against all forms of ideological oppression.'.
like a page pulled cleanly from a daily artist\'s journal, this untitled canvas features basquiat\'s personal iconography, some reminiscent of that of paul klee.  basquiat demonstrates in one concise "study" how he is able to carry on an ancient practice of painting "still life", all the while suggesting, as does a great jazz musician, that the artist\'s work was relatively effortless, if not completely improvisatory.'.
an example of basquiat\'s early canvas-based work, untitled (skull) features a patchwork skull that seems the pictorial equivalent of mary shelley\'s frankenstein - a sum of incongruent parts. suspended before a new york city subway map-like background, the skull is at once a contemporary graffitist\'s riff on a long western tradition of self portraiture and the "signature piece" of some anonymous, streetwise miscreant.
like the cheap, shiny rubber it is meant to imitate, the surface of balloon dog (orange) evokes the eternal appeal of precious metal. koons once remarked that he believed balloon dog (orange) to be "a very optimistic piece, it\'s a balloon that a clown would maybe twist for you at a birthday party.
"hennessy/the civilized way to lay down the law,"a caption typical of the advertising industry\'s multi-layered symbolism, accompanies the image. to "lay down the law" means to give instruction in a bossy way, and is often used to describe spouses setting the limits on drinking.
michael jackson and bubbles is perhaps the ultimate expression of koons\' abiding interest in flouting the conventions of good taste.  koons is, in effect, asking us to regard michael jackson and bubbles as a sincere and significant artwork.'.
in koons\' work, the vacuum cleaner is an important recurring symbol. the categorization of new hoover convertibles as art transforms the retail display into a shrine to commerce.
for generations of adults, from the baby boomers to millennials, the mere sight of play-doh is nostalgic, conjuring the scent and tactile appeal of this strange, yet calming synthetic substance. first unveiled at koons\' 2014 retrospective exhibition at the whitney museum of american art in new york city, rendering of play-doh is the culmination of two decades of planning and execution.
wall\'s a sudden gust of wind (after hokusai), reinterprets the scene in a woodcut print by japanese printmaker and painter katsushika hokusai. on the one hand, the photograph displays real people caught in a real gust of wind.
in the photograph changing room, wall depicts a woman standing in a changing room, presumably within a department store. changing room showcases wall\'s ability to suggest a lot with selective visual details.
wall\'s photograph, listener, offers an unsettling perspective of six men in a barren outdoor space. even the title, listener, suggests the need for careful attention, lest something terrible happen if instructions are not followed.
jeff wall\'s photograph picture for women, from 1979, continues the artist\'s investigation of 19th century painting within the framework of contemporary photography. picture for women addresses the male gaze, a topic increasingly analyzed, debated, and often resisted within the art world in the years surrounding this picture\'s creation and display.
in the destroyed room, wall not only hints at the creative process, but also engages with the questions raised by conceptual artists of the time. the destroyed room, from 1978, is one of canadian artist jeff wall\'s first and most iconic photographs.
components of this piece include a table of human bone remnants, led text boards, and photograph of words written on skin. though always political, from 1993 onward, holzer became more explicitly and directly engaged with the physical and mental impacts of violence and trauma.
here, in the space below the yellow bar, the barely visible painted text appears: "a group presently in the united states plans to conduct a terrorist operation involving the use of high explosives." vertical bands of color radiate across the rest of the canvas in a manner reminiscent of mid-century color field painting.
led technology was relatively new in the early 1980s. signboards were capable of displaying blocky letters in varying fonts, colors, and simple graphics.
 by flooding this hallowed space with technology not normally considered art, holzer pushed the everyday into confrontation with the eternal.' among the most visually striking of holzer\'s works, her installation at the guggenheim in 1989 contained blinking messages from her various series, spiraling down the interior ramp of the famous building.
characteristic of the artist\'s early work with the female nude, branded presents a direct and unidealized image of the female body. using this as a means of countering preconceived notions about the representation of women, saville has literally branded these words on the painted flesh.
by doubling her image, saville presents herself as both subject and object, artist and model. in mirror, the obscured faces of famous female nudes from art history peer out at us.
taken from the series continuum, with mothers saville began (after the birth of her two children) to examine how pregnancy changes a woman\'s body. the movement in the painting and the use of drawing makes mothers stylistically different from her earlier work.
saville\'s painting of two intertwined bodies, one black, one white, recalls the title of manet\'s olympia of 1863. art historian john elderfield has noted olympia masterfully combines drawn lines and painted values, bringing together painting and drawing in a single work.
saville\'s striking self-portrait, plan, makes use of extreme foreshortening to present an uncompromising image of the female nude. looking directly at the viewer over the marked terrain of her body, saville calls our attention to complicated issues surrounding women\'s bodies, plastic surgery, and the "cult of exercise.".
dine\'s artist book, birds, consists of a series of black and white photographs of stuffed and dead birds. beyond his personal encounters with birds, these birds represent, to dine, the deep-seated fears of the unconscious, an interpretation which links to freudian theory and psychological thriller films such as alfred hitchcock\'s the birds (1963).
like most of dine\'s work, car crash had very personal and autobiographical roots, literally inspired by his own automobile accidents. the word crash functions as both a noun and a verb.".
this painting is one of several in which dine takes everyday objects and imbues them with meaning.  where pop art dealt with the popular, dine creates a hybrid that uses the ordinary to connect to his history and to imply deeper levels of meaning.'.
unlike the highly-finished marble of the original sculpture, dine\'s venuses are roughly molded and cast in bronze, which amplifies their uneven surface. this public installation combines these two themes, enlarging three versions of the classical venus de milo.
while many artists have traditionally represented themselves with the tools of art-making, dine focused on tools used by the worker, most often iron-workers. dine is interested in the iconic nature of these tools, which have simple shapes determined by their function.
in the smiling workman, the 1959 happening for which he is most known, dine wore painters\' clothing covered with red, blue, and gold paint, while his face was painted gold and red with a clown\'s mouth. by destroying his own work, dine firmly centered the artistic identity of this piece as the performance, not the product.
once again, dine adopts a popular icon, here from children\'s literature and popular disney movie, to explore levers of narrative and symbolism. dine claims, "i saw the walt disney movie when i was six, and i was very frightened by it, enchanted by it.
in mirror piece i, jonas along with other female performers employs mirrors as props in which they slowly perform a series of choreographed movements in front of a live audience. indeed, by using very large mirrors that could easily break if not handled correctly, jonas sought to create an unsettling feeling.
reanimation brings together many of the elements of multi-layered materials and meanings which jonas has explored throughout her practice. jonas comments that her interest in layers stems from "the way our brains function.
a striking 15 feet wide, bracket is a magnificent example of mitchell\'s late work. known for creating large works, her use of two or more panels allowed her to create monumental works of art.
mitchell\'s paintings are striking in their sheer physicality. she used bold and active strokes of paint on large canvases.
la grande vallee paintings are an outstanding group of 21 large-scale works created over the span of just one year. uniquely conceived as a whole or unit, the paintings created a lush and poetic environment when exhibited together.
in french, telleul is a linden tree, and mitchell created a group of paintings inspired by the tree in front of her home in vetheuil, france. tilleul is one of mitchell\'s most direct examples of landscape abstractions.
untitled (1951) was one of the seminal works in joan mitchell\'s first solo exhibition at the new gallery in new york city in 1952. paul brach\'s review announced, "the debut of this young painter marks the appearance of a new personality in abstract painting.
trained as an elementary school educator, itten was deeply influenced by the pedagogy of friedrich froebel, who argued that learning was accomplished through play. this student work was completed in itten\'s vorkurs preliminary course, highlighting the class\'s emphasis on experimentation with materials and studies in contrast and form.
in this painting, christ sits in the house of his close friends, the sisters martha and mary. while martha is busy cleaning, cooking for, and serving the son of god, mary sits calmly and contentedly at his feet and listens to him preach.
the iconic pearl, which historians are unsure as to whether it is an unusually large pearl or simply polished tin, has been replaced with an unassuming burglar alarm.   regardless of the identity of the mysterious girl, or the authenticity of her pearl, her face remains an iconic image of youthful beauty in baroque art.'.
vermeer ended his artistic career the way he started it, by painting an intrinsically, even inescapably catholic image. many scholars believe that this image was commissioned for yet another private hidden church, or schuilkerk, by dutch catholics.
this image of the procuress appears to take place within the walls of a shady, dark brothel.  similarly, vermeer seems to have taken inspiration for this scene from other works like the procuress by dirk van baburen, (c. 1622) which was, in fact, owned by vermeer\'s mother-in-law maria thins and displayed in their shared house.'.
one is dressed in the typical muted black garments of the proudly protestant dutch nation. vermeer has depicted a serene glimpse into city life during the dutch golden age, a period when the economic, technologic, and art world in the netherlands were at their peak.
in this painting, vermeer shows us the private moments of a woman reading a recently opened letter. however, this is at odds with the silhouettes of women in other vermeer portraits such as girl reading a letter at an open window, (c. 1657-59).
in this video piece, baldessari makes several arm movements, reciting the phrase, "i am making art," after each gesture.  baldessari offers no definitive answer, but he suggests that the gap between art and the ordinary, between art and life, may be imperceptible.'.
it led to a number of works, of which tips for artists who want to sell is an important example. a clear stab at the art market, he uses humor to poke fun at the absurdity of traditional art and "how-to" art instruction manuals.
cage\'s cheap imitation is an exercise in postmodern appropriation that relies on musical, rather than visual, quotation.  through his use of appropriation, cage made a smooth transition into the pastiche typical of postmodernism, a cultural shift that began in the late 1960s.'.
 his application of chance elements and new media in the number pieces further cemented his position as an innovator throughout his entire career.' this final series by cage prefigured many postmodern artistic pursuits, especially later explorations of duration and ambient sound and the use of new technology to create art.
heavily influenced by cage\'s studies of indian music and philosophy in the early 1950s, this cycle of 16 sonatas and four interludes was composed to express the eight "permanent emotions" of the rasa indian tradition. sonatas and interludes was dedicated to armenian-american pianist maro ajemian, who performed in the recording of the piece and during its debut at carnegie hall in 1949.
referred to by many as simply "the event," the piece involved several simultaneous performance components - all orchestrated by cage, where chance played a determining role in the course of the performance. theater piece no. 1 was one of cage\'s first large scale collaborative, multimedia performances, created and performed while cage was teaching at black mountain college in north carolina.
in his twenties while living in chicago, chamberlain discovered the sculpture of david smith at the art institute.  with the contrasts of its sharp-edged vertical and horizontal elements, cord predicts the look of his art to come.'.
a 1981 commission for the city of detroit was an example of the need to foot the upright parts securely. as the scale of his sculptures increased, he confronted the need for armatures to hold the many and varied pieces of painted steel upright.
as if wanting to rival the trees that surrounded it in his garden, luftschloss reaches for the sky. by this stage in his career chamberlain had gathered a group of gallerists and collectors in germany and visited there frequently.
chamberlain described miss lucy pink as his response to the critics who called his work violent. an openly feminine sculpture, miss lucy pink has clear affinities with the women paintings of chamberlain\'s good friend willem de kooning.
they also remembered chamberlain\'s love of music, especially jazz, that might be recognized in the resemblance of the sculptures to comical woodwind instruments.  more frivolous and more endearing, the second seagram building installation would have delighted the boy from indiana who had made it really big in new york city.'.
shortstop launched chamberlain\'s career as a major artist in the mid-20th century; his subsequent works with car parts stemmed from this initial breakthrough piece. made entirely from "found" materials - the fenders of an abandoned antique ford - shortstop reinvested the french surrealists\' use of "found objects" with american virility.
but chamberlain continued working with foam and made several room-sized couches for museums and gallery installations as well as for private collectors. chamberlain made two significant groups of urethane foam and cord tied sculptures in 1966 and 1967.
in the post-world war ii cultural atmosphere automobiles were an important symbol of american recovery and industrial leadership. since his college years chamberlain had written poetry and read widely so he wasn\'t above using sly allusions to popular culture.
whilst constable created over 100 portraits in his career, most were painted out of financial necessity rather than a love of the genre. this portrait has a particular sensitivity and warmth to it and this must be attributed to his intimate relationship with the sitter.
after 1822 constable moved away from strict documentary accuracy and his paint surfaces become rougher and more expressive. the image demonstrates constable\'s skill at portraying the effects of changes in weather, light, and time of day.
constable started painting salisbury cathedral from the meadows shortly after the death of his wife and, although exhibited in 1831, he continued to work on it until his death in 1837. the image is the last of his large six foot canvases and constable believed that one day it would probably be considered his greatest picture.
the hay wain is now one of the most celebrated and widely known of constable\'s works, although when it was first exhibited it was considered unremarkable. the curve of the river in the foreground draws the eye away from the mass of the trees towards the hay wain itself which becomes the focal point of the image.
he told new york magazine in 2007, "the bea arthur painting is from maude, which i used to watch as a kid. i was walking back from the path train and this vision of bea arthur just came to me.".
since the late 1990s, currin has taken inspiration from the mood and atmosphere of flemish and italian renaissance paintings to explore the cliches, biases, and sexual desires hidden just beneath the surface of mainstream culture. the figure\'s loosely tousled hair, body, and mien bring to mind the classical muses, nymphs, and goddesses of artists like botticelli.
in his evolving depictions of the female nude, john currin expertly mimics a number of distinct styles from art history, merging high and low source materials to produce works that succeed simultaneously as satire and homage.  one might weave a common thread between the objectification/mysticism of the body of christ and the female nude, both of which continue to be placed on a pedestal, even in death.'.
many of currin\'s early works focus on older women, exemplified by the figure depicted here. the image of this woman is not taken from life, nor meant to depict any actual person.
in this iconic work, we find two women engaged in the seemingly ordinary act of bra shopping. the redhead helps the blonde take an accurate measurement in what could be construed as an act of communal sisterhood.
moreover, though the pair\'s eyes are closed, the woman faces the viewer as if in anticipation of an audience. this painting comes from currin\'s most recent series, which takes inspiration from print and online pornography.
in blue still life , graham stopped short of total abstraction, but essentially eliminated depth and reduced his palette to a single tone. in the early 1930s, graham\'s work continued to reveal the influence of picasso through his preoccupation with cubism and the simplification of form and color.
rather, their curves draw influence from surrealism\'s biomorphic forms; further, the circles suggest eyes, and the title of the work seems to imply that it depicts two figures in an embrace. here, the interlocking shapes have been further simplified, but they are no longer hard-edged.
iron horse clearly reflects graham\'s interest in surrealism, in particular the work of giorgio de chirico. though not present in this work, graham often arranged additional objects around the central figure that seem discordant with the setting and contribute to the surreal, dreamlike mood of the image.
in this, graham drew inspiration from an urban setting to create a cubist-influenced abstraction; the interconnected blocks of color show the clear influence of picasso. though the titular surfaces are discernable, graham has flattened the picture plane and created no illusion of depth - an important signpost in the development of abstract expressionism.
this painting was produced only a few years after graham arrived in new york and began studying under john sloan at the art students league. the tablecloth, like the other objects, is arranged deliberately rather than naturally to provide an opportunity to foreground the transitions between light and shodow.
kurt tucholsky authored the book germany, germany above all, and heartfield designed its cover in 1929. additionally, the words "deutschland, deutschland ber alles," written in fraktur script, spill out of the figure\'s mouth, suggesting he is merrily singing the national anthem.
this self-portrait captures heartfield in the act of "cutting off" with scissors the police commissioner zrgiebel\'s head in a printed photograph. this montaged self-portrait of heartfield showcases his critical art, which boldly fused dada theatricality with a resolute political stance.
this popular 1928 election poster equates the five fingers of the laboring hand with the number 5 of the communist party\'s electoral list.  for this poster, heartfield deployed this concept to great effect in synthesizing the demands of the workers with the communist party\'s electoral platform.'.
from september 1905 to january 1906, sargent traveled throughout what was then known as the ottoman levant, visiting jerusalem, syria, and beirut. sargent traveled on horseback and visited bedouin camps in the jordan valley, and later certainly used the trip as inspiration for his extensive mural cycle, triumph of religion (1895-1916), at the boston public library.
sargent met monet during his student days at the ecole des beaux-arts in paris and their friendship developed over the ensuing years. sargent\'s adoption of the impressionist style here is quite different from the more realistic approach noted in his portrait work.
in preparation for these works sargent visited soldiers on the front lines in belgium and france. this very large painting (over 7.5 feet tall and 20 feet long) shows the aftermath of a german mustard gas attack.
this painting is a prime example of the commissioned portraits of the upper classes that eventually earned sargent fame. sargent purposefully surrounded meyer with objects of sumptuous luxury in order to emphasize her reputation as a lavish member of the london upper crust.
accordingly, sargent\'s madame x stands at the forefront of modern portraiture. gautreau reportedly grew bored with their sessions and would frequently run off to various social obligations, leading sargent to lament "the unpaintable beauty and hopeless laziness of madame gautreau.".
this early work illustrates the influence of the old masters on sargent. the composition is different than that seen in a traditional group portrait wherein each subject is given equal status.
like many of his contemporaries, sargent was captivated by the beauty and character of venice; he visited the city frequently between 1898 and 1913. sargent diverged from standard watercolor painting with his extensive use of gouache, or opaque white watercolor paint.
"the / soot-brown tail-tuft on / a kind of lion-/tail; what would that express? / and john steuart curry\'s ajax pulling / grass - no ring / in his nose - two birds standing on the back?" marianne moore\'s 1932 poem, the buffalo, pays tribute to curry\'s colossal ox, ajax.
sometimes, however, as in hogs killing a rattlesnake and the later painting, ajax, curry moves into a rarefied space of ambiguous, allegorical expressiveness. here, seven furious hogs converge from all sides of a woodland glade upon a doomed rattlesnake.
 the mob is a mob for the ages, the judge a figure of absolute justice.' in this mural, created for the justice department as part of the federal arts project, curry presents a stark narrative depicting a crazed lynching mob and the powerful forces of justice.
nowhere is this more apparent than in this gripping, muscular scene, where a tornado screams towards a kansas farm. "it was action he loved most to interpret: the lunge through space, the split second before the kill, the suspended moment before the storm strikes," said grant wood of his fellow regionalist painter, curry.
curry paints an old testament fury into his figure, giving the painting a visionary power alongside its brutal violence. in this instance, curry stormed out of topeka and left the mural unfinished and unsigned.
albers created this mural for the lobby of the pan am (now metlife) building in 1963, again at the request of the building\'s architect, his friend and mentor, walter gropius. albers created the mural as a tribute to new york city, based on an early work city, a 1928 bauhaus glass "wall painting" of interlocking rectangles that use color and placement to suggest both three-dimensionality and movement.
albers executed this exterior sculpture at the request of his colleague paul rudolph, the architect of the then-new art and architecture building at yale university.  like albers\'s homage to the square series, which deal with the optical effects produced by color and line, repeat and reverse uses a simple arrangement of steel bars to reproduce a three-dimensional illusion of planes that appear to project and recede from the wall.'.
in 1942 josef albers embarked on a series of zinc plate lithographs entitled graphic tectonics, a title that references both the solidity of geological matter and movement. while he is best known for his color studies, much of albers non-sculptural work prior to the 1950s was monochromatic and focused on unmodulated linear and geometric relations, spatial ambiguity, and the perception of dimension, creating "maximum effect from minimum means.".
in soft spoken, albers has added a fourth square, and narrowed the range of color, while retaining the calculated asymmetry of the other works in the series. this work in the homage to the square series was executed almost 20 years into what may be the most sustained exploration of the relational character of color in 20th-century art.
the archaeological ruins in this photograph, located in amman, jordan, reveal our human hubris in creating monumental works intended to stand the test of time.  in many ways, koudelka\'s work over the last thirty years has been concerned with man\'s creative and destructive effects.'.
she faces the viewer head on, speaking directly to the audience, while he is seen in profile, gazing down. koudelka contrasts the faces of a man and a woman: his expressionless, calm face and her expressive, articulate countenance.
koudelka lived among the roma (gypsies) in slovakia and romania in the 1960s, as well as among gypsies in other european countries, spanning a period of sixteen years. three young gypsy boys proudly display their toughness to survive the challenges of their nomadic existence, in spite of their thin bodies, as they puff up their chests like western bodybuilders.
this photograph, taken in france, shows a dog crossing a railroad track in the desolate parc de sceaux in the middle of winter. this series exiles depicts the desolation experienced by those in exile.
koudelka\'s photo-book the black triangle documents this man-made environmental disaster zone. in this photo essay, he provides us with a new understanding of what homage to nature may mean.
created in 1964 and encased in a glass, temperature-controlled museum display case, fat chair subsequently underwent a slow, natural process of decay until 1985, by which time the fat had almost entirely decomposed and virtually evaporated. fat chair exemplifies how beuys could turn two common materials of everyday life - here the organic components of fat and wood - into a composite, open-ended metaphor for the human body, its impermanent condition, and the tendencies for social life to conform to constructed convention.
in this performance piece, beuys could be viewed - his head and face covered in honey and gold leaf - through a gallery\'s windows, a slab of iron tied to one boot, a felt pad to the other, as the artist cradled a dead hare.  as for most of his subsequent installations and performance work, beuys had created a new visual syntax not only for himself, but for all conceptual art that might follow him.'.
perhaps even more important, the sleds are exiting the bus, not being towed by it, as at first it may seem.  this suggests that each sled is an independent and sentient entity, here released (or born) into the wild to find others in need of rescue.'.
this work on paper dates from beuys\'s early experimental phase, which was characterized by the artist\'s production of thousands of drawings under a self-imposed program of aesthetic asceticism.  woman/animal skull suggests a melding of the rational and the instinctual, or of the human and the animal minds out of a primordial state of organic chaos.'.
cassiopeia 1 is dedicated to another of cornell\'s primary interests: outer space. a white moon-like ball rests on two thin metal bars that are positioned vertically within the walls of the box.
part of cornell\'s medici slot machine series, medici boy features repeated renderings of the early italian renaissance painter bernardino pinturicchio\'s portrait of a boy, within the context of a modern-day slot machine. the early-15th century and the 20th century come together in medici boy.
with his mother and brother\'s worsening health in the 1960s, cornell\'s family responsibilities increased and his time for his artwork correspondingly lessened. the collage reflects the artist\'s knowledge of art history, acquired through his trips to new york city art museums.
evoking a pinball machine, penny arcade portrait of lauren bacall combines cornell\'s fascination with bacall, then at the peak of her stardom, with his childhood memories of new york\'s penny arcades. this top row of images also suggests a filmstripfurther homage to the artist\'s love of cinema.
 the box was one of numerous works titled soap bubble set, a theme linked by their creator not only with childhood but also with the cosmos.' in these works, cornell used the surrealist practice of juxtaposing unrelated found objects, in this case, a doll\'s head, a clay pipe used to make soap bubbles, a bird\'s egg, a glass, an antique map of the moon, and a print of the leaning tower at pisa.
kosuth\'s neon works have typically employed only single words or short tautological phrases that could be viewed in their entirety at a glance. kosuth uses longer texts for this neon installation and highlights many of his most important intellectual and philosophical influences.
five words in orange neon is among the many language-based works kosuth made using neon lights and a transformer, all of which were inspired by wittgenstein\'s explorations of tautologies. in this case, they are shown with orange neon tubes shaped to form the words of the phrase.
it makes us more aware of why and how words become the verbal and written equivalents for commonplace tangible, solid things and objects. kosuth continued this exact formula in subsequent works, employing a shovel, hammer, lamp, and even a photograph itself (including a photograph of the photograph and definition of "photograph").
this painting depicts a steam-powered train speeding across a modern bridge away from london. in the distance is an older bridge and in the lower right is a small hare.
before it sweeps your decks, throw overboard  the dead and dying - ne\'er heed their chains  hope, hope, fallacious hope!   john ruskin, the first owner of slave ship, wrote, "if i were reduced to rest turner\'s immortality upon any single work, i should choose this."'.
in 1834 a fire engulfed the houses of parliament and burned for hours while londoners watched the horrifying event. turner made a series of sketches, watercolors, and oil paintings of the spectacle from the viewpoint of the thames river.
in the fighting temeraire, turner depicts a once powerful and magnificent warship being towed to its final destination to be broken up for scraps. steam-powered vessels were taking the place of the large sailing vessels of the past.
stella began this abstract rendition of the sights and sounds of coney island in late 1912, after returning to the united states from paris.  after a few years, however, it was accepted as a hugely influential work of the american avant-garde.'.
in this painting, stella depicts factories that extract ammonia, tar, and light oils that are released when coal is burned. such mechanical processes fascinated stella, and he once recalled, "opposite my studio was a huge factory . . . towering with the gloom of a prison.
the 1920s in italy saw a renewed appreciation for early renaissance art, particularly artists such as piero della francesco and giotto. with the virgin, stella moved dramatically away from the industrial and urban scenes that made him famous, turning instead to a highly traditional subject: the biblical figure of the virgin mary.
many critics and curators of stella\'s work consider this monumental, five-panel painting to be his finest work. all over the world, new york city and its celebrated skyscrapers remained an object of fascination.
harlequin, a time-honored subject in art, appears in approximately 40 of his works produced between 1917 and 1925. here, his background as an illustrator is visible in the cartoonish eyes and mouth, and the bright graphic lines that trace the figure and its costume.
gris idolized picasso. a clever tribute to his mentor, his portrait depicts picasso (founder of cubism) in the cubist style.
 flagrantly breaking the rules, and combining "low art" (design elements such as the beer bottle logo and newspaper typography) with "high art" (the traditional still life elements), still life with checkered tablecloth illustrates his brilliance in furthering the goal of cubism: making something new out of the connections between life and art.' like flowers, it too contains a hidden message, this time, in reference to his native spain: a bull\'s head.
rather than a specific individual, the old peasant in this scene is an archetypal resident of the area. a return to traditional values, subjects, and forms is reflected in gris\'s work after 1918, and is typical of avant-garde painting in general in the years after world war i. from summer through fall of 1918, he temporarily relocated to touraine, the countryside region where his wife, josette, had grown up, and painted peasants in the traditional clothing of the region.
composed of three dome-like forms and using transparent material with spray-on plastic, this piece is rendered in the minimalist style of chicago\'s early work.  critic susan jenkins suggests that the work prefigures the "purely feminist idiom" that was to come: the three domes make up what came to be chicago\'s signature stylistic motif, the triangle, closely associated with vaginal imagery in chicago\'s oeuvre.'.
part of chicago\'s powerplay, a five-year-long project that occupied the artist from 1982 to 1987, driving the world to destruction portrays an exaggeratedly muscular male figure grasping a steering wheelhere a symbol of uncontrolled patriarchal power.  powerplay overlapped with the birth project, though it marks a shift in subject matter as chicago moved away from the female body as the sole repository of emotion.'.
after the dinner party, chicago continued to address the underrepresentation of female experience, this time related to the lack of imagery in western culture portraying the moment of birth. one of the images from chicago\'s birth project, created between 1980 and 1985, hatching the universal egg depicts a squatting woman giving birth to the egg of life, depicted in rich tones and a warm and translucent light flowing from her womb.
while exploring the manifestations of power in powerplay, chicago directly encountered issues surrounding the holocaust, which highlighted her ignorance of her own jewish heritage. representing the "terrible imbalance of priorities in the world\'s treatment of children," imbalance of power includes a series of horrifying images, among them a nazi soldier who appears to be pointing his gun at a warsaw boy, depictions of starving children, and the famous photograph of a vietnamese girl being burned by napalm.
through the flower is one of the landmark pieces of chicago\'s early feminist phase.  it serves as the title and cover of the artist\'s 1975 autobiography as well as the name of the non-profit feminist art organization she founded in 1978.'.
this "stain painting" exemplifies olitski\'s early work as a member of the color field movement. to create its bold, simple composition, olitski poured diluted paint onto a large canvas measuring nearly nine feet in height.
in the later 1980s and early 1990s, olitski reintroduced color into his work. lives of angels is painted in thick layers of iridescent acrylic paints.
in his breakthrough works of 1965 through 1966, olitski began using high-powered spray guns to apply paint to canvas. the work\'s title refers to "prince patutsky," a nickname that olitski\'s stepfather had given him in his childhood.
olitski later remarked, "that the paintings i was doing with rollers, such as tin lizzie green, would lead to the spray gun couldn\'t have been foreseen by me. for the transitional works that fell between his early stain paintings and his well-known spray paintings, olitski used rollers to apply very thin layers of paint to the canvas.
this portrait of annie wilhelmina philpot (1854-1930) was considered by cameron to be her first photographic achievement, tellingly entitled "annie, my first success". annie\'s three-quarter length portrait shows her head and shoulders on a slight angle to the left of the photograph.
julia jackson was the mother of the artist vanessa bell and the legendary author virginia woolf, the later of which wrote the first book on her great aunt, julia margaret cameron. cameron created over twenty portraits of julia jackson, usually capturing her likeness simply, either with loose hair or in noble dress.
in late 1865, julia margaret cameron began using a larger camera. painted only very shortly before this photograph was made, one wonders if perhaps cameron had had a sneak preview of rossetti painting having become close to the pre-raphaelite brotherhood.
this half-length image of sappho is modelled by mary hiller, who often sat for cameron. sappho was a greek poet active in the 6th century bc who famously wrote about women experiencing passionate love with other women.
the madonna and child was a recurring motif for julia margaret cameron and a subject close to her heart as a mother to six children herself.  there is an uncanny resemblance to lange\'s iconic 1936, migrant mother photograph (executed mere 70 years later, and thousands of miles away).'.
here he utilizes a drop cloth, typically reserved for catching spills and other debris as the painter works. fakires is a testament to schnabel\'s tendency to experiment with a variety of surfaces beyond traditional gesso-treated canvas.
with his eerie portrait of fellow artist andy warhol, executed on black velvet, schnabel has united low culture, pop art, and the high-art tradition of portraiture. warhol stands dramatically alone on the right side of the composition in a sea of black velvet.
this work was inspired by schnabel\'s visit to spain in the late 1970s. the chaotic, irregular surface created by the broken crockery lends spain a sense of danger, and the disembodied head, a standard feature in many works by schnabel, reinforces the sense of uneasiness.
schnabel\'s mature work is simpler, less heavily-loaded, materially if not content-wise. a small printed canvas is mounted on the larger surface, on which schnabel loosely applied pigment with very little blending.
with its life-sized figures and grand title, this scene evokes history painting (considered the highest art in the 19th century, and used to commemorate grand events). this and several other works by walker are displayed in curved spaces.
untitled (john brown), substantially revises a famous moment in the life of abolitionist hero john brown, a figure sent to the gallows for his role in the raid on harper\'s ferry in 1859, but ultimately celebrated for his enlightened perspective on race. walker\'s critical perceptions of the history of race relations are by no means limited to negative stereotypes.
in the same year as completing the abstract portrait, dreier commissioned duchamp to produce a painting to hang above the bookshelves of her manhattan apartment. eschewing the traditional representational nature of her earlier work, dreier renders her dear friend in an abstract, non-figurative manner.
titled 40 variations, this vibrant set of abstract images intended to capture musical experience in visual composition. both events made a deep impression, and there flashed on my mind the query - why not translate these two experiences into the realm of abstract art?".
incorporating her love for rural landscapes as well as abstract elements, the work resists straight-forward, stylistic categorization. dreier\'s image, however, is not the product of a simple act of imitation but constitutes, rather, an individual expression borrowing elements from a variety of sources.
this is a relatively early work made when sage was still experimenting with various styles, and especially with geometric abstraction. the painting is composed of tri-dimensional rectangles of different sizes that have been stacked together randomly and precariously.
 also arguably freer than the closed space of the egg and, especially in this painting, drapery poetically recalls the flowing hair of a woman.' at this point in her career, sage depicts the egg less and drapery and the color red more.
this presence of more curved lines and shapes give a less oppressed atmosphere despite the suggested scene of a wreck. the drapery is beautifully rendered and the painting has more details and colors in general than other works by sage.
in one of her very last paintings, sage depicts a mass of frames, canvas, stretchers, and blank rectangular shapes. actually in this group of last paintings, sage experiments with a different kind of iconography of emptiness: the repetition of the same element ad infinitum.
kahlo depicts her own psychological pain through the fissure through her torso and small nails that pierce her skin. this was sage\'s last self-portrait painted before her death and unusually depicts the human figure.
interestingly a very similar shock of red hair appears in an earlier work by tanguy called girl with red hair, painted in 1926. there is a constructed idea created by a patriarchal society to what a woman is or should be and sage is perpetually challenging and de-constructing this notion.
however, at the time, in airplane flying malevich was able to further explore the pictorial potential of pure abstraction.  his abstract painting was meant to convey the concept (abstract idea) of the plane flying in space.'.
additionally, malevich saw the black square as a kind of godlike presence, an icon - or even the godlike quality in himself. now badly cracked, the iconic black square was shown by malevich in the 0.10 exhibition in petrograd in 1915.
in the late years of his life, malevich returned to exploring the more conservative themes of his earlier work such as peasants and portraits.  and yet, the artist has "signed" the painting with his own black square in the lower right corner.'.
in the reaper, malevich explored the human figure through a pictorial vocabulary reminiscent of the work of the french cubist fernand leger. the body and the dress of the peasant are rendered in conical and cylindrical forms adopted by malevich from the cubist school.
van dongen painted la chimre pie when he was only eighteen years old, during his years in the family malt house near rotterdam. la chimre pie displays many characteristics the artist would continue to cultivate over the course of his career.
femme au canape shows van dongen at his height as a society portraitist. van dongen gravitated toward certain compositional layouts, revisiting them over the years.
the manila shawl, with its luscious peonies and chinese-inspired scenery, evokes paul poiret\'s avant-garde dresses and matisse\'s colorful odalisques.  it also indicates van dongen\'s growing awareness of his own potential to create drama with fashion, which would later be the key to his popularity as a society portraitist.'.
in 1907 the fauve group had already started to unravel. this painting brings together some of the features of the fauve movement, such as the expressive use of unmixed colors and the pictorial flatness - and introduces an element of realism that marks a turning point in van dongen\'s work.
the romanian transvestite singer modejsko is featured in this composition - the epitome of the violent explosions of color of which van dongen was capable at the height of his engagement with fauvism. he portrays modejsko with his mouth open, ready to perform or already performing a song.
until their divorce in 1921, van dongen\'s wife, augusta "guus" van dongen, born preitinger, was one of his favorite models. the low-angle composition, lifted chin and half-closed eyes recall those of gustav klimt\'s biblical and allegorical heroines, among them hygeia (1900) and judith (1901).
i think we\'re almost trained to read the reclining figure in a painting within an erotic state. the subject is depicted reclining on a wooden bed covered in a white sheet.
this repositioning of a black woman as murderer of a white woman has received a great deal of criticism and concern that it encourages violence against (white) women, and portrays black women as perpetrators of violence. there are numerous historical references for this painting, with several artists (including caravaggio and artemisia gentileschi) having depicted the subject matter of judith beheading holofernes.
the composition is the same as david\'s masterpiece, with the figure gesturing upward with his tattooed right arm while sitting confidently atop a rearing white horse, upon a rocky landscape. wiley notes, "equestrian portraiture became such a phenomenon because it represented man\'s domination over nature, and by extension over women".
in october 2017, wiley was selected by former u.s. president barack obama to paint his official portrait to appear in smithsonian\'s national portrait gallery america\'s presidents exhibition. in the portrait, obama wears a dark blue suit and a white collared shirt with the top two buttons undone, and no tie.
randerson romualdo cordeiro is himself a favela dweller, who wiley met on the streets of brazil. the yellow background is composed of brightly colored blue and red flowers with green foliage.
he explains, "i have a studio in west africa, my father is from west africa, my body is from west africa. one of the men stands shirtless, in blue jeans, with one hand upon his hip and the other holding up an oar.
crack is wack is a public mural painted on a handball court in harlem, new york city that can be seen from fdr drive. the "crack" in the mural refers to a cheaper form of cocaine that is smoked rather than snorted, and "wack" is a slang term meaning "not good.".
free south africa was a political response to the conditions of apartheid that still existed in south africa.  almost a decade later president mandela ended apartheid for good in 1994.'.
as his art career unfolded, and his confidence grew, it gave him the courage to generate more sexually explicit images of gay figures and scenes. visually, the image is classic haring in its flat, two-dimensional surface, cartoon-like simplicity and the use of vibrant, saturated colors.
a more graphic appreciation of the male form, this distorted rendering of a single large male figure gripping his own enormous, life-engendering penis suggests as much ambivalence as affirmation.  haring\'s artistic productions called for radical new cultural possibilities and greatly expanded social understanding.'.
here at mid-career he created an elephant sculpture in papier mache painted over with acrylics. his signature black human cartoon persona was painted in different positions all over the white elephant.
this piece is of a different character than haring\'s usual stylistic choices. in this untitled piece, however, the balanced composition seems as important formally as the symbolic representations of the content.
in some chevron paintings, such bend sinister, noland placed his compositions off-center against neutral grounds. although noland\'s titles are often difficult to decipher, this one makes a clear allusion to the painting\'s structure: "sinister" is the latin word for "left," the direction in which the chevron forms point.
in this mature circle canvas, noland painted three concentric circles in complementary colors: yellow, magenta, and red. although the viewer may attempt to see the circles as receding into space, they remain flat on the picture plane.
the late 1950s marked an important turning point in noland\'s career.  we seem to be witnessing the conception of form, as order is manifested out of chaos.'.
in the late 1960s, noland ventured into new territory with his striped paintings.  by working on a monumental scale, he has also granted pure abstraction the same status as traditional history painting or landscape painting.'.
this early oil painting dates close to noland\'s first visit to helen frankenthaler\'s studio, when the artist was clearly still working under abstract expressionism\'s influence and trying to find his own painterly voice.  noland\'s early style is exemplified by visible brushwork, monochromatic palette, and calligraphic markings; the painting\'s title indicates that he had not yet ceased making references to the material world in his art.'.
whereas noland\'s chevrons and circles series created visual tension between color and blank background, vault is animated from edge to edge with color. noland said in a 1977 interview, "paintings have their own boundaries, their own zones, their own limits.".
her cast bronze features are somewhat gestural, the surface rough and unrefined in places, characterizing the earthy, uncontrollable nature lilith personifies. smith\'s bronze sculpture, lilith, is a continuation of her interest in female figures from folklore, mythology, and cultural narratives.
lying with the wolf is part of a short series of works on paper based on fairy tales. the intimate relationship between the woman and the wolf has roots in biblical, mythological, and feminist themes.
smith had considerable experience in printmaking, having experimented with monotype, and screen methods since the late 1970s. it is impossible to discern the figure\'s gender (though smith herself posed for it, while assistants traced her), reinforcing its enigmatic quality.
one of her early large-scale wax sculptures, untitled explores the human body from within a variety of themes such as religion, procreation, life, and death. the anonymous-looking, unidealized figures are caucasian, depicted in mostly naturalistic skin-tones with areas of red-tinted mottling on each (the male figure is of noticeably ruddier complexion).
the open-arm posture, however, suggests images of a eurocentric \'virgin mary\', for which this sculpture is named, and is reminiscent of orans figures of early christianity. smith\'s interest in the elemental functions of the human body, particularly with female anatomy, merges with her feminist perspective, and the iconography of her catholic religion in her sculpture, virgin mary.
 maraak encapsulates schwitters\' attempt to negotiate between the viewer\'s world and that presented within the constrictive space of the work itself, commenting on their overlapping yet ever distinct essence.' this work, featuring mono-color painted rectangles laid out side by side in a way that emphasizes the flatness of the canvas, demonstrates schwitters\' grasp of a more abstract style in the late 1920s, one indicative of his growing interest in de stijl.
merz picture 32 a. the cherry picture is remarkable for its abstract design and its abandonment of any sense of illusionistic hierarchy. in this work schwitters continues his exploration of abstract collage, creating an intricate and complex work that incorporates many different materials and pieces.
schwitters continued to add objects to this "column" which gradually changed and transformed schwitters\' entire living space into a series of grottoes and caves. schwitters\' most ambitious work is a (no longer existent) multimedia construction that he eventually named the merzbau.
after world war i, schwitters began to collect broken and discarded materials he found on the streets and arrange them into works of art. this work demonstrates a significant shift in schwitters\' early artistic practice from primarily conservative figurative painting to abstract collage.
fashioned from plaster and found objects, this diminutive assemblage is characteristic of the mixed media sculptures schwitters produced toward the end of his life, while exiled in england. despite its unassuming stature and materials, this sculpture embodies the enduring tenderness and whimsy unique to the artist\'s oeuvre.
pacific red ii (2017) is a striking installation consisting of a series of six nested chevrons, built from two pieces of six-foot-square red glass panels meeting at right angles. varying in color from bright orange, cool blues, frosty whites and blood red, bell has departed from the metalizing process to laminate large planes of glass in varying shades of film ranging in translucency.
in 1978, bell started to experiment with coating paper with the same metallic deposits he had previously used on glass.  the layering of shapes and nuanced gradients create, in much the same way as his early geometric paintings, a push-and-pull illusion of depth and volume on the flat picture plane.'.
bell\'s earliest sculptural works echo the shaped paintings. the front and the back were cube-like shapes with opposite corners cut at a 45-degree angle, similar to the canvases.
there is a quiet monumentality to larry bell\'s iconic glass cube sculptures. as curator michele d. de angelus notes, "the qualities of the space in bell\'s cubes, though visually perceived, are kinesthetically sensed.
in fact, warhol was right to place works like cedar bar menu in the space between abstract expressionism and pop. the apparently pedestrian theme of the piece - the menu at the cedar bar, a perennial haunt of new york school artists during the 1950s - belies the personal and cultural resonance of the image.
they aren\'t, after all, about an intimate encounter with the dutch original, or any evocation of such a direct and moving meeting. around the mid-point of his career, rivers began to turn more emphatically to the insignia and iconography of consumer culture, in line with the explosion of pop art across the 1960s.
he explored the same theme two years later with final veteran: the last civil war veteran in the coffin (1961), a more figuratively accurate work. now he was a media thing immediately; the last civil war veteran.
in this work from 1964, one of several on the \'vocabulary lesson\' theme, rivers takes a further step towards figurative art, while also revealing his deep affection for pastiche. he helps to give birth to conceptual art.
river\'s painting was an act of open rebellion against such mythmaking, and to properly understand the work, we need to examine the context of its composition. rivers painted this epic work after reading the famous russian novel war and peace (1869).
habeas corpus is a collaboration between laurie anderson and mohammed el gharani consisting of a video installation and soundtrack. for most of habeas corpus gharani sits motionless and silent - "conjuring," as critic will hermes writes, "something of what solitary confinement might feel like.".
in 1989, laurie anderson released strange angels, her fourth studio album produced for warner brothers records. it was alongside this that the series of videos personal service announcements were produced and aired on commercial music television (particularly mtv and vh1).
the end of the moon is a 90-minute-long performance created as part of anderson\'s artist residence at nasa between 2003 and 2004. in the end of the moon the artist exhibits her skill in constructing compelling narratives.
like miller, anderson attempts with the waters reglitterized to remember and navigate her own dreams. anderson\'s installation the waters reglitterized presents the viewer with works of art developed from dreams.
united states i-iv is a seven-hour-long multimedia performance that combines earlier versions of her performance united states with newly developed material. the performance, which combines text, music, photography, film, and projected drawings, is thematically organized into four sections: \'transportation\', \'politics\', \'money\', and \'love\'.
room underneath (red) shows the lower half of a seated woman\'s body. room underneath (red) can be linked to gustave courbet\'s l\'origine du monde (1866), a famously-shocking realist painting centered on a woman\'s abdomen and genitals, clearly visible between splayed legs.
this photograph shows a dollhouse sink set at an angle to, and casting a shadow on, wallpaper patterned with leaves and lines. these leaves are as large as the sink itself and the faucets and support for the sink overwhelm the small basin, which is filled with water.
the dolls that simmons used in this image were sold as lifelike, and life-size, sex toys. simmons first encountered them on a trip to japan, purchasing one and ordering another several months later.
now my friend from new york, who is very active against gun violence, wants to use it as an edition to sell to raise money and consciousness about gun control and gun violence, something i really care about and think about." this work comes from simmons\' objects on legs series, which seeks to question and critique the role of women in society.
as in his other projects, le corbusier prioritized the automobile, connecting the sectors through wide boulevards. he tapped le corbusier for the job after the project\'s first architect, matthew nowicki, was killed in a plane crash.
in notre-dame-du-haut one sees how le corbusier\'s work provides architectural critics and historians with a vast array of avenues for analysis in an attempt to decipher his achievement. thus this mysterious panoply itself invites a kind of intellectual rumination and reflection that undoubtedly mirrors the religious contemplation that le corbusier attempts to encourage in the pilgrim.
described by le corbusier as a "relaxing machine," this chaise longue embodies his approach of placing the human body in the center of design. indeed, le corbusier reportedly quipped that the design was inspired by images of american cowboys reclining with their feet propped up on a table.
built entirely out of the industrial materials of steel, concrete, and glass, the villa savoye exhibits several links with modern means of transport that fascinated le corbusier. the villa savoye was commissioned by an upper-class parisian couple as a weekend house in poissy, 19 miles away from paris.
bontecou has created a compelling vortex into which the viewer is pulled as though being drawn irrevocably into an actual black hole. the black hole, purposely built into the composition, relates to the infinite mystery and wonder of the unknown universe.
bontecou used heavier-weight paper, which she found to be less susceptible to damage from the heat of a blowtorch. bontecou used her fingers, razor blades, and erasers to unearth the hidden images contained within the forbidding black (fingerprints are still visible throughout the work).
bontecou incorporates the gas mask and the pipes to create the opposition between the natural and industrial environments. the air pollution is represented by the gas mask that protrudes from the center of the full bloom on the right.
bontecou created the fish forms by carving the shapes out of styrofoam -- yet another modern, industrial material. the viewer\'s attention is also draw to the smaller life forms being digested in their translucent bellies.
her galaxy of canvas and metal is suspended from the ceiling and materials spiral and overlap in a manner resembling planetary rotation. the rotating rings and planets are drawn together by a central blue porcelain orb, the central star or life-generating sun in bontecou\'s imaginary galaxy.
nowhere is this facet of his work more evident than in father duffy. father duffy is part of a series on american monuments in which friedlander proposed a new look at romanticized political, military, and religious icons.
one of friedlander\'s favorite subjects is his wife and muse maria. putting that detail to one side, maria is posed in medium close shot, illuminated by the rectangular shards of light that pass through a horizontal (venetian) window blind.
nashville is drawn from friedlander\'s early series little screens.  in this sense, friedlander\'s scrutiny of the proliferation of television screens seems somewhat prescient.'.
though major civil rights victories had been won - notably 1964\'s civil rights act and 1965\'s voting rights act - more indirect forms of segregation endured well into the 1970s. given the time and place to which it belongs (1970 new orleans), we are able to locate quite specific meanings in an image that sits squarely within friedlander\'s \'social american landscape\' cycle.
in another of his iconic images, friedlander exploits a common photographic \'mistake\' by allowing his shadow to encroach on his frame. yet once more, the meaning in friedlander\'s work is illusive.
during the mid to late 1940s, krasner worked hard to undo her cubist orientation and to more fully express her inner self. with these paintings, krasner expanded the visual vocabulary of abstract expressionism.
krasner\'s cool white demonstrates how she could exploit a limited color palette of somber umber tones and white to its maximum effect through her dynamic use of form and brushwork.  cool white stands as krasner\'s own interpretation of large scale, broad-gestured, intuitive painting for which pollock is better known.'.
inspired by the natural world, krasner painted large, floral, and organic shapes, alive with color and pulsating with new energy. krasner\'s signature vibrant use of color, lifelong interest in the fecundity of nature, and joyous sensibility were among her key contributions to the often brooding, deeply serious post-war abstract tendencies of her peers.
in 1941, moma exhibited a major show of native american art, which greatly excited several abstract painters including lee krasner and barnett newman.  inspired by carl jung\'s theories of a collective unconscious, native art was seen as especially relevant to modern art and life through its formal complexity and mythological basis.'.
showing her indebtedness to picasso, seated nude displays cubist elements such as krasner\'s non-realist command of geometrical, cube-like forms and her experiments with space.  her dark application of charcoal line, vigorously worked over the surface, testifies to her assured hand and growing talent.'.
 although initially her teachers under-appreciated krasner and doubted the veracity of her painting outdoors, they did promote her into the life drawing class.' situated outdoors, which creates an air of 19th-century naturalism, krasner painted self-portrait in order to advance as a student within the national academy of design.
taken while on assignment for vogue magazine, this photo bridges miller\'s work as a fashion photographer and as a war correspondent. two models, wearing air raid precautions masks sit casually on newspapers at the entrance to miller\'s bomb shelter at her home in north london.
this image, taken at dachau concentration camp in 1945 shortly after its liberation by the american 6th army, shows several prisoners peering at the camera from their bunks whilst another sweeps the central aisle.  miller also photographed guards who had attempted to escape the camp and been were in turn attacked by the tortured and brutalized prisoners.'.
anglo-german film star lilian harvey posed in miller\'s new york studio. elegantly attired in a sequined, satin evening gown, the actress is seated with her (cropped) legs outstretched, leaning on her left arm.
taken from inside a tent near siwa, egypt, portrait of space looks out onto a desert landscape, through a torn mosquito net "window." a dark wood picture frame in portrait orientation hangs from the net above the tear.
the title has a whiff of humor as the remington silent was a popular typewriter model, although this particular typewriter has been rendered silent by the previous day\'s bombings. its keys form a tangled cascade with the ribbon, which then streams over the edge of the carved stone block.
ordinary things, framed to detach them from context to dreamlike or humorous effect recur in miller\'s early photographs of paris. here, four white rats perch side-by-side in an ambiguous space.
based on photographs of a weekend spent with family and friends, croquet game is one of the few paintings bell has not modified since its original creation. at the far left is bell with his arm around his wife ulla, who appeared in many of bell\'s works, showing a tender connection between the two.
numerous bell paintings recreate a scene similar to that of dusk, where a domestic group responds to a butterfly or bird, taking inspiration from balthus\' la phalene (the moth), in both the intrusion of nature and the figures\' lively gestures.  bell depicts each figure as an individual entity, while also drawing them together through nearly sculptural use of light and shadow.'.
part of a series of paintings of similar titles and subjects, morning ii is one of bell\'s largest two-figure works. in contrast to the distinct, black lines outlining the forms within his paintings, bell often blurred fingers and toes into the surrounding colors, further suggesting continued movement.
given his focus on domestic life, still life arrangements were unsurprisingly a frequent subject for bell. even in this seemingly static scene, bell found ways to integrate movement through shadow and in the folds of the fabric.
 temma in orange dress is one of many canvases bell painted of his daughter throughout his career.' in many of bell\'s works, the arms and legs are a primary focus to convey a feeling of movement.
text appeared in many of these paintings which typically combine a series of symbolic references, including dogs, lions, skulls, and skeletons. during the 1990s, golub\'s work continued to address themes of mortality and conflict but his palette became more vibrant and his scenes less narrative.
golub began to paint images of men, specifically heroes, in classic moments of extreme glory and demise. the horizontal arrangement of the figures in gigantomachy ii is reminiscent of those of ancient doric friezes.
between 1976 and 1979 leon golub worked on a series called the political portraits. golub said of this work and others from the same series, "i think of the political portraits as skins or masks".
in two black women and a white man, three characters stand in two separate groups without making eye contact. it is the women who seek to make connections and start dialogue, whilst the man actively rejects this.
marking a shift from previous work, vietnam ii is an exceptional example of golub\'s dramatic large-scale figurative style that explicitly addresses contemporary issues, here the vietnam war. in these, the largest and most physical paintings of his career, golub adopted an active stance against the vietnam war, engaged with the progression of the conflict throughout the vietnam series.
oddly enough, lady with an ermine has found an unusual cult following in contemporary society. but other interpretations suggest the ermine is representative of cecilia\'s fidelity to the duke.
king louis xvii of france is said to have commissioned salvator mundi after his conquest of milan in 1499. the painting is a portrait of jesus in the role of saviour of the world and master of the cosmos.
the duke of milan, ludovico sforza, commissioned the last supper for the refectory of the convent of santa maria della grazie. all of these elements greatly influenced, and were used by, leonardo\'s peers of the time including michelangelo and raphael.
mary\'s eyes peer down at her christ child who points to the heavens as he delivers a benediction. because this piece is impeccably preserved, it is assumed it never made its journey into a full work of art.
vitruvian man depicts a man in two superimposed positions. in the second position, the man\'s legs stand apart and his arms extend to demonstrate the circumference of a circle.
dimanche aprs-midi presents multiple portraits of fini intertwined with her cats, with all of the figures placed on shelves as though they could be dolls and ornaments.  she treated her own cats like human beings and identified with them to such a degree, that she herself became in part, a cat.'.
the painting shares its theme with the giantess (the guardian of the egg), painted in 1947 by leonora carrington. whilst in other works by fini the egg has been broken, here the tone is entirely different (more positive) and the egg is intact.
at this point in her maturity, fini seemed to depict women as either priestesses or as sorceresses. here she explores the latter theme with five witches flying on their broomsticks through a crimson red sky.
petit sphinx hermite, translated to little hermit sphinx, is a key work of fini\'s post-war period. the sphinx with eyes downcast in a gesture of intense reflection is a portrait of fini herself.
in this relatively early self-portrait, fini confronts the viewer with a direct stare and reveals a hidden scorpion beneath a single glove (a commonly recurring motif within the surrealist oeuvre). fini was known to intentionally rip outfits with the suggestion of clothes torn in passion, especially when a trace of red is revealed beneath the folds of fabric.
painted when fini was 61 years old, the painting is fresh and simple in comparison to the earlier highly charged and intense canvases by the artist. indeed, from the 1960\'s onwards, although fini continued to make erotic works, there is a light playfulness that emerges before unseen.
both the title of this work and the image itself are apocalyptic in tone. fini, semi-immersed in swampy black waters, is surrounded by chaos, destruction, and death.
later in her career, carrington added portrayals of older women to her visual vocabulary of repeated settings and figures. the structure in the background of bird bath recalls her childhood home, crookhey hall, which was decorated with ornamental birds motifs.
this early painting by carrington was completed as a tribute to her relationship with the surrealist artist max ernst. in the foreground, ernst is shown enshrouded in a strange red cloak and yellow striped stockings holding an opaque, oblong lantern.
this painting perfectly summarizes carrington\'s skewed perception of reality and exploration of her own femininity. in the window in the background, a white horse (which may also symbolize the artist herself) gallops freely in a forest.
two geese appear to be emerging from beneath the figure\'s cape, and delicately painted animal figures and shapes are delineated on the giantess\'s gown. themes of transformation and metamorphosis were significant for carrington, as was the concept of a feminine divinity with life-giving powers.
coney island, also known as coney island bather, is model\'s most iconic photograph. this image appropriately illustrated an article that celebrated coney island as a democratic space for leisure, which appeared in harper\'s bazaar.
however, this divorce was actually waiting to receive her state residency in nevada to be able to divorce under nevada\'s law. divorce, reno demonstrates model\'s sensitivity to the impact social restraints have on individuals as she portrays the gutsiness of this individual woman.
museo capidoglio, rome personifies a male bust, as the strong shadows and contrasts add drama.  works such as the museo capidoglio, rome were considered of a lesser significance and remained unknown until 1990, when the national gallery of canada presented the most complete model retrospective to date.'.
 model\'s composition is reminiscent of eugne atget\'s parisian shop windows from the 1920s with their spatial and reflective, yet surrealist qualities.' model believed the images conjured within these shop windows were natural photomontages.
this energetic image presents the female jazz singer as a statuesque figure by photographing her from below and at an angle. for model, the snapshot came closest to the truth, allowing her to scrutinize her subject\'s character, even in its grotesque form.
 times square is one of her early metropolis pictures, and it captures the photographer\'s enchantment with her new home.' this image of a crowded sidewalk unmasks new york city\'s crowded streets and frenetic pace through the walking legs and clustered shoes of its urban dwellers in the major commercial and tourist center.
dictionary is a large-scale, ink-and-watercolor work on paper, depicting an old chinese dictionary in a highly realistic manner. in a 2010 interview with asia art archive, liu explains: "i found out the dictionary was made in taiwan around 1937.
ink handscroll, is a nearly 60-foot-long painting, depicting abstracted landscape forms, intertwined and unfolding across a traditional handscroll format. as the scroll opens, the red tones fade into grays and blacks, as liu refines the palette to the archetypal monochromatic style of chinese landscape painting.
the actual peak of mount huangshan it is said to represent is 1,830 meters high, and its name "celestial capital" refers to the daoist "capital of the immortals and the city of heaven." the work seen here is a sectional view of a standing stone accompanied by five lines of calligraphic script emphasizing the vertical dimensions of the drawing.
before applying the ink, unlike the chinese ink painting tradition, liu does a careful meticulous underdrawing in pencil. liu created many similar drawings in this manner, taking both the poppy and the sunflower as his subject.
the work was inspired by the raphael drawing liu dan owns, titled saint benedict receiving maurus and placidus (c. 1503). the ink drawing, featured at his first exhibition in europe at the eskenazi gallery in london in 2015, is a large-scaled painting two meters in height and three meters in length.
in his latest series, liu dan turns the tables once again with a new approach to a traditional subject. unlike the western tradition, in traditional chinese landscapes there are multiple views into the scene, sometimes referred to as "scatter perspective," as different elements are drawn as if viewed from different vantage points.
this series dealt with the dramatic changes in bourgeois\'s private life in the early 1940s: marriage and domesticity, living in a foreign country, and mothering three children. bourgeois struggled to live up to her idealized memory of her own mother.
femme volage is part of bourgeois\'s personnages series, made between 1945 and 1955. femme volage is a fractured piece made up of stacked wooden forms on a central rod that resembles a needle or spindle, tools that likely reference her mother\'s work as a weaver.
this work evolved from bourgeois\'s personnages, but whereas the earlier works were rigid and singular, fort shows what bourgeois referred to as a "softening" in her work stemming "from the softness of my children and of my husband ... in fort, unlike in personnages, the wooden forms are placed together on a single base and suggest human figures or even plant forms huddled together.
bourgeois is explicit about this connection: "the spider is an ode to my mother. the spider first appears in bourgeois\'s work in the 1940s, and had explicit, positive associations for the artist, who saw the spider as a symbol of her mother.
soft landscape i was made by pouring caramel-colored resin over biomorphic forms that resemble a landscape. in the 1960s, bourgeois shifted from working with wood to other materials such as plaster, cement, aluminum, and latex.
spiral woman, a hanging doll, showcases bourgeois\'s longstanding interest in both dollmaking and the spiral form, as seen in the much earlier femme volage (1951). like hans bellmer\'s poupes, the figures in the spiral woman series offer distorted, surrealist-inspired visions of the human body.
this was bourgeois\'s first installation piece at a time when installation art was in its infancy and was being used by feminists such as judy chicago. the work was also bourgeois\'s first to explicitly reveal her anger over her father\'s infidelity, which was an underlying motivation for much of her work.
barbara and eugene schwartz were eminent collectors of the pictures generation, collecting work from sherman, sherrie levine, richard prince, and lawler herself. arranged by barbara and eugene schwartz comes from one of lawler\'s earliest exhibited series of photographs documenting domestic and institutional display of works of art.
true to its title, bulbs depicts a string of light bulbs which are part of a sculpture by felix gonzalez-torres, laid out on the floor in preparation for installation. instead of providing the exhibition with any previously produced work, lawler spent months alongside the collection\'s handling and installation crew in documenting the minutiae of the artworks\' "backstage" life outside the public view and exhibiting context.
 often nuanced rather than didactic propositions (perhaps excepting the announcement to her 2003 solo-show at metro pictures that stated \'no drinks for those who do not support the anti-war demonstration\'), works like helms amendment and war is terror (2001/2003) offer a complicated but still legible criticism of political decisions.' the remaining six frames that show the amendment\'s text represent those remaining senators who either voted against or abstained from the vote for the amendment.
burton tremaine, connecticut. developing her consideration of the nature of collecting, in 1984 lawler took her iconic image, pollock and tureen, arranged by mr. and mrs.
untitled (salon hdler) is an example of the way louise lawler recirculates her own earlier photographs. a multiple of the original large format photograph, salon hdler (1992-93) is presented within a glass half-orb reminiscent of a paperweight or a snow globe.
her photograph, swan lake, lincoln center, taken from her seat at the performance further asserts this, acting as an index of her presence.. however, even though on an official level the invite changes nothing, it still mediates the experience of those going at lawler\'s invitation, creating a community of her guests in amongst the other theatre-goers.
as in many of her works, nevelson created royal tide i as part of a larger series of works, which were exhibited at the 1962 venice biennale. the palette of royal tide i also reflects her childhood emigration, since, as nevelson noted, america was often referred to as the land where the streets were paved with gold.
 sky cathedral was part of the series of exhibitions in 1958 that marked nevelson\'s rise to notoriety.' the larger than life-size sky cathedral is nevelson\'s sculptural answer to the monumental abstract expressionist canvases of the predominantly male artists that commanded the attention of american art during the 1950s.
transparent sculpture iv is one in a series of geometric, gridded works that resembled transparent, high-tech jewelry boxes or glittering futuristic palace maquettes in their repeated, clear structures. although transparent sculpture iv is much smaller in scale than her earlier works, her use of an industrial fabricator and commercial materials represents an intermediate step in nevelson\'s continued sculptural evolution.
in her search for new materials nevelson was drawn to wood, as opposed to bronze or marble. this work is an example of nevelson\'s early, small-scale abstract constructions that relied on found materials selected for their visual or emotional appeal.
typical of freud\'s early period, girl with a white dog was created using a sable brush, which he used to apply the paint with linear precision, almost like a drawing. freud painted many portraits of kitty during their brief marriage, which ended in divorce in 1952, due to his chronic infidelities.
in sharp contrast, a standing man is standing behind her and staring at her. settling in paris in 1952, freud painted many portraits, including hotel bedroom (1954), which features a woman lying in a bed with white sheets pulled up to her shoulders.
in man with leg up, bowery lies on the floor with his legs splayed. nearly all elements in this scene, from the supine pose to the splayed legs indicates vulnerability.
the subject matter is conventional, but the pose is one rarely, if ever, seen in traditional western portraiture. the subject is tim behrens, a friend and student at slade school of art, where freud was a visiting teacher.
freud\'s self-portraits, an enterprise to which he returned frequently over the years, offer direct insight into his psyche. whereas other sitters look ungainly and awkward, the level of self-possession in the pose here is typical of freud\'s self-portraits.
fontana chose to call these works concetti spaziale (spatial concepts) rather than paintings, revealing his intense interest in recognizing the role of the surrounding space. no longer confined to physical materials, fontana\'s art can exist in the infinite realm of space.
fontana further enhanced the spatial complexity of the puncture by applying thick layers of white oil paint around the opening\'s edges. in these later olii works, fontana made aesthetic choices that implied emotions, such as anxiety and restlessness, offering a raw, almost primitive, glance at the creative impulse.
figure nere is an example of fontana\'s early ceramic sculpture, featuring a rough-hewn, rectangular terra-cotta slab with two black silhouetted figures, a taller one behind a shorter figure in the front.  even though his early works like figure nere are meant to be seen from one, frontal angle, fontana was already exploring the idea of manipulating the materials to evoke a sensation of physical space in the image.'.
here, much like the simple yet impactful shapes produced by the cuts in his painted canvases, natura has an elemental, raw appearance.  fontana conveys these themes through his simplicity of forms, allowing the materials to carry meaning even in their understated appearances.'.
mies\' method of accommodating the house to its natural environment, particularly the garden, was a skill that he continued to employ throughout his career. moreover, mies\' client was alois riehl, one of the most significant figures at the time in german philosophy circles and a university professor.
like mies\' other furniture designs, the barcelona chair represents the extraordinary fruit of collaboration between him and reich, which ended with mies\' immigration to america in 1938. despite the chair\'s status as a touchstone of modernism, its design contains multiple ironic twists.
mies\' signature postwar residence, the farnsworth house arguably represents the ultimate in minimalist residential architecture using industrial materials. the cold materials of construction and spartan mies-designed furnishings did little to dispel the image of a building devoid of warmth and energy-inefficiency.
mies\' glass skyscraper reveals the imaginative ideas of avant-garde german architects for the possibilities of industrial construction during the early years of the weimar republic. here, the undulating faade, including two elevator shafts, sheaths the building entirely in transparent glass, revealing the full structure of steel.
crown hall is especially significant for the way that it demonstrates the ability of industrialized construction to open up interior space. for mies, the completely open studio design was the ultimate in utility, as the room can thus be configured and subdivided in whatever scheme that is needed for classes and critiques.
the seagram building constitutes mies\' definitive, realized statement on the form of the skyscraper. mies\' design is somewhat understated.
mies\' first truly modern house (all his previous realized dwellings had been traditional masonry structures), the tugendhat house is a superb example of how he used the possibilities of modern construction to blend a building with its landscape.  having languished in disrepair, it has undergone extensive restoration recently, and, after all these years, welcomes visitors today that can appreciate mies\' work and legacy.'.
the affective experience of anthropophagic slobber has been compared to a kind of collective vomiting, or a pulling out of one\'s own viscera. anthropophagic slobber investigates the phantasmatic force of the body; it is not concerned with the body in itself, but with its psycho-sensorial capacities.
as the artist noted, the importance of biological architecture lies in "the exchange between people and their intimate psychology". biological architecture extends clark\'s earlier investigations into sensorial experience, shifting the register from the individual (as with sensorial masks) to the collective.
the word \'organic\' requires elucidation: clark did not intend this term to refer to something resembling a biological form: her organic line is not sinuous, undulating or otherwise life-like. discovery of the organic line recalls the work of dutch abstract art pioneer piet mondrian, as well as that of russian constructivist el lissitzky and suprematist painter kazimir malevich.
composition: staircase is one of clark\'s earliest works, completed while she was studying with the painter-turned-landscape-architect roberto burle marx. as curator and scholar paulo herkenhoff notes, "clark\'s staircases are passageways, the ambivalent flux of going up and down.
walking (caminhando) is a pivotal work for clark, suggesting the dematerialization of the art object and the turn towards an art based in process and participation. the line made by walking is thus a non-functional one that exists as an action rather than as a physical object.
after being refused editorial space in artforum, an eminent art magazine, the enraged benglis paid for an advertisement that consisted of a full-page photograph of herself, nude except sunglasses, and masturbating with an oversized double-ended dildo. both images were intended to highlight the absurdity of the sort of hyper-masculinity that dominated the art world.
in the 1980s benglis continued to work with metal, but added wire, zinc, corrugated aluminium and other lighter materials that could be folded, bent, or twisted. eridanus, a knot-like form, hovers over the surface of the wall with the apparent lightness of a paper flower.
lynda benglis made several video pieces in the 1970s, when she was working at the university of rochester and could use the school\'s equipment. now is the most well-known of these works, and made a significant impact on the field of video art and critical theory.
one of a series of works named after letters of the greek alphabet, psi is a sculptural knot made from various materials. like now (1973), benglis\' film of the same year, it is self-referential, self-contained, and apparently infinite.
this work, cast in lead in 1975, was based on an earlier composition created in benglis\' studio. the bottom and two sides are essentially a cast of the space created by the walls and floor.
this image of the dessau bauhaus studios captures two experimental threads: the unusual vantage point and nighttime lighting create a geometric pattern from the architecture of the balconies. in particular, he explored avant-garde techniques of framing and unusual vantage points, as well as night imagery and dislocating perspectives.
the large green bridge looms over a street lined with buildings painted in contrasting red, creating a sense of unease and tension. the work\'s non-descriptive use of color led the salon\'s hanging committee to include feininger\'s work in a room of fauve paintings.
drawing on the cubist faceting of forms, feininger evokes the power of wind and water with this image of a brutal coastline. while the majority of the canvas is monochromatic, like the cubists, feininger enlivens the central portion with reds and blues that pierce through the atmospheric ground.
 the painting is important in the way it brings cubist painting to life, and resituates possibilities for the meeting of figurative, still life, and abstract painting all within one picture plane.' here the two figures of the title are constructed in sharp lines, with curving circles at their joints.
this is one of a series of paintings popova made in 1916. using the bright colors of russian icon art, popova adds a painterly dimension with the visible brushstrokes and white edges in the foremost shapes.
in 1923 popova began designing fabrics to be manufactured by the first state textile printing works in moscow after the enterprise published an open invitation to artists to work in their factory. where she had previously represented industry and machines in her moving cogs and abstract forms, the russian textile industry provided popova with a perfect opportunity to make art that could be mass-produced in a genuine industrial enterprise.
the letters are cut horizontally by alternating colors, the block font signaling a departure from historical scripts, and a nod to constructivist geometry. using a pared-back color palette of just red and black, popova creates a standout graphic for the second edition of the journal of the left front of the arts.
using pure shapes and geometry, popova illustrates physical and spatial dynamism. the suprematist group, now including popova, exhibited in regular shows in st petersburg and moscow, published a journal, and taught in art schools.
this image is part of the body of work that escher produced in italy from 1923 to 1935.  whilst castrovalva is approached with realism escher also created images in this period which were more fantastical such as the bridge (1930) which incorporates realistic architectural elements into an imaginary framework.'.
this complex composition showcases the merging of earth and sky, night and day and different living creatures into one another. he initially created work utilizing the abstract geometrical elements he saw there, but gradually replaced these with stylized figures of animals, as seen here.
one of the last paintings from his italian period, this lithograph depicts escher sitting in his studio in rome, reflected in a mirrored sphere which is held in one of his hands.  in his work escher is both acknowledging this tradition through his detailed study of his own reflection and subverting it through the depiction of the mechanics of its creation.'.
portraying an interior space consisting of multiple staircases leading in many directions and opening up to different, light-filled exterior spaces, relativity is part of escher\'s \'impossible constructions\' series. of these works escher stated, "i can\'t keep from fooling around with irrefutable certainties" and to \'make fun of gravity\'.
it was later reconstructed and made into multiples using the money man ray received from the insurance. man ray re-created this work multiple times after making the original.
this piece was made in the afternoon on the opening day of man ray\'s first solo show in paris. another assisted readymade, ray took a simple utilitarian object, an iron, and made it evoke different qualities by attaching the tacks.
 here, again, man ray is exploring his interest in the real and unreal by challenging the meaning of still-life photography.' looking almost like a film still, this cropped photograph demonstrates man ray\'s interest in cinematic narrative.
this photograph of kiki de montparnasse\'s head next to an african ceremonial mask bears a title that references both the black and white process of photography as well as skin color. the oval faces of the two almost look identical in their serene expressions, but he contrasts her soft pale face with the shiny black mask.
this is one of man ray\'s earliest rayograms, a process by which objects are laid directly on to a photo-sensitive paper then exposed to light. rayograms gave man ray an opportunity to be in direct contact with his work and react to his creations immediately by adding one layer upon the next layer.
this early, assisted readymade (a found object slightly altered) was created a year before man ray left for france. marcel duchamp\'s influence and assistance are evident in this dada object, in which a sewing machine is wrapped in an army blanket, and tied with a string.
this portrait of chagall\'s first wife, bella, whom he married in the summer of 1915, also doubles as a love letter of sorts. chagall once remarked that, "only love interests me, and i am only in contact with things that revolve around love.".
 abstraction is at the heart of this work, but it exists to decorate the picture rather than invite analysis of the images.' chagall depicts a fairy tale in which a cow dreams of a milk maid and a man and wife (one upright, one upside down) frolic in the work fields.
paris through the window appears to reflect upon chagall\'s feeling of divided loyalties - his love both for modern paris and for the older patterns of life back in russia. hence the figure in the bottom right looks both ways, and the couple below the eiffel tower seems to be split apart.
 chagall considered this window, today referred to as the "chagall window," not just a memorial to one man, but a thank-you card of sorts to the country that granted him asylum during his time of need in world war ii.' the committee invited chagall to contribute a piece of his work, and it was soon decided that the monument would be a free-standing piece of stained glass.
although chagall became well known for his religious and biblical motifs, the blatant christian symbolism present in white crucifixion and other works (particularly his stained-glass windows for several churches) is surprising given chagall\'s devout orthodox jewish background.  instead it makes the crucifixion into a sign of their common suffering.'.
shortly after finishing his design for the "wassily" chair, breuer continued his explorations of the plastic possibilities of tubular steel with the b32, or the cesca chair, as it is now popularly called. with ease, breuer\'s design thus marries the traditional methods of craftsmanship - the woven caning hand-sewn into the wood frame - with the industrially mass-produced tubular steel.
made of leather and cantilevered steel, the wassily chair has become one of the world\'s most enduring and iconic pieces of furniture. breuer designed the chair at the age of the 23, while still an apprentice at the famed bauhaus in weimar, germany.
the house thus appears as a prism partially nestled into and partially resting on top of the shoreline, creating a kind of belvedere for the ocean views. in the words of john hagerty, "the house was to be focused like a camera toward the magnificent expanse of ocean...blank walls would cut out the view of neighboring houses.".
located just south of muskegon, on the eastern edge of lake michigan, saint francis de sales catholic church sits amidst a mixture of single-family homes and commercial and industrial structures. here, the inclined, windowless concrete walls give the effect of a cave-like, yet warm, communal space, at once welcoming and enfolding those inside.
today, the site contains several other significant auxiliary structures (some designed by zehrfuss alone), but breuer, zehrfuss and nervi\'s edifice remains the linchpin of the complex. one of breuer\'s most prominent architectural commissions was the headquarters for unesco, which he designed in collaboration with bernard zehrfuss and pier luigi nervi.
many of broodthaers\' major works from the beginning of his artistic career in the mid-1960s engaged with questions of national identity. in this sense, broodthaers arguably references the sense of diversity within belgium\'s national identity.
the initial purpose of la salle blanche was to be a recreation of the apartment-studio where broodthaers had inaugurated his muse d\'art moderne in brussels in 1969. broodthaers instead covered the walls with words related to the creation and understanding of art: "gallery," "collectors," "color," "perspective," "amateur," "shadow," "paper," etc.
in a way, pense-bte showed broodthaers mocking both his own history and his fellow contemporary artists. as his first "official" piece, pense-bte set the tone for the rest of broodthaers\' artistic output, including his pursuit of preserving ideas of experience.
art takes on a scientific guise in this intricate piece whose several component parts are neatly displayed alongside or slotted into a bespoke wooden case. to make this piece, which reads like a visual demonstration of the workings of chance, duchamp dropped three threads, each exactly one meter long, from a height of one meter.
built in secret over a period of more than twenty years, etant donnes is considered duchamp\'s second major work. at first glance, etant donnes is a direct reference to courbet\'s painting, origine du monde (1866).
this miniature model of a traditional french window was made to duchamp\'s specifications by a carpenter in new york.  the title, inscribed at the base along with the words "copyright rose selavy 1920," would have been an obvious pun in the aftermath of world war i, which turned many a lusty or "fresh" young spouse into a widow. (incidentally, the work marks the debut of duchamp\'s feminine alter ego, rose selavy.) as if to signal mourning, the eight windowpanes are covered in black polished leather, which fully blocks out the view, thus playing havoc with the notion of painting as a window onto the world.'.
marcel duchamp\'s scandalous l.h.o.o.q is an altered postcard reproduction of leonardo da vinci\'s mona lisa. in endowing the mona lisa with masculine attributes, he alludes to leonardo\'s purported homosexuality and gestures at the androgynous nature of creativity.
like a traveling salesman\'s kit, this boite-en-valise (box in a suitcase) is one of twenty-four editions of a leather case that contains sixty-nine miniature reproductions of duchamp\'s artworks.  la boite-en-valise calls to mind andr malraux\'s "museum without walls," not least in its use of photographic reproductions.'.
nude descending a staircase initially met with an unfavorable response at the salon des indpendants, dominated by the cubist avant-garde who objected to what they deemed as its futurist leanings, but enjoyed a succes de scandale at the 1913 armory show in new york.  this painting together with the contemporaneous passage from virgin to bride marks the end of duchamp\'s short-lived career as a painter.'.
 engraved on a copper ring around the globe\'s circumference, the inscription "rrose selavy et moi esquivons les ecchymoses des esquimaux aux mots exquis," ("rrose selavy and i dodge the eskimos\' bruises with exquisite words.") when pronounced in french, the phrase wittily conveys the hypnotic visual effect verbally through a complex of echoing sounds.' based on an earlier model duchamp and man ray had experimented with in 1920, rotary demisphere (precision optics) consists of a white papier-mache globe mounted on a velvet-lined disk that calls to mind the rings of saturn.
the bride stripped bare by her bachelors, even, or the large glass was partly inspired by author raymond roussel\'s use of homophones, words that sound alike but have different meanings. duchamp frequently resorted to puns and double-meanings in his work.with the large glass, he sought to make an artwork that could be both visually experienced and "read" as a text.
this crowded canvas conveys the chaos, action, sound, and fury of a night at the cabaret voltaire. this work provides a vital visual record of the sensory overload of sight and sound engendered by a night at the cabaret voltaire.
janco\'s abstract plaster reliefs answered tzara\'s call for artists "to create directly, in stone, wood, and iron." he felt that art should be incorporated into architecture the same way art should be incorporated into life, stating that abstract art "must be in architecture or disappear.".
 at this final occasion dancers wearing janco\'s masks so incited the audience that the night ended in a mass brawl.' janco\'s masks no doubt reflect his "faith in a direct art, a magical, organic, and creative art, like that of primitives.".
the ability of abstract symbols to convey ideas and unite people became a main tenet for the new horizons group seeking to create an artistic language for a new nation. janco\'s combination of abstract and figurative elements indicate his deep interest in the symbolism of shapes.
a row of ocean liner portholes on the upper level in the fuchs villa, are a nod toward the art deco aesthetic. villa jean fuchs was a truly groundbreaking structure and, accordingly, was met with shock and skepticism on the part of many critics.
janco created a number of works on this theme following the arab-israeli conflict in 1948. instead of focusing on the concept of the heroic soldier, these works capture that of the injured, the praying, and the ones in retreat.
during her hiatus from painting, werefkin had immersed herself in art history, and had filled countless notebooks with writings and drawings, creating over 400 sketches in a fluid, expressive style. this small painting, showing a half-naked woman in high heels, knee-length stockings and hat, is one of the earliest works created by werefkin after her return to painting in 1906.
the work depicts the city of kovno in russia - modern-day lithuania - where werefkin was staying with her brother in 1909 while recovering from a leg injury.  in various respects, then, return home can be considered an important early painting of her mature period.'.
the piece uses broad, loose brushwork, with the abstract patterning built up by the repetition of strokes across certain areas of the canvas assuming primary visual significance. werefkin uses an array of bold colors and tones to convey her own inner life: intense blues and greens for the background; vivid browns, reds, and yellows for her skin, hat, and clothes.
painted four years before werefkin\'s death, the religious subject-matter of the monk is typical of her later work, in which the symbol of the crucifixion appears repeatedly.  perhaps based on a new spiritual faith, that hidden world seems divested of the gloom of her earlier work, the color-palette of the monk instead conveying a mood of bliss and hope.'.
art historian laima lauckaite has pointed out the affinities between paintings such as the rag-and-bone man and those of the lithuanian painter m.k. iurlionis. painted in 1917, this work shows a rag-and-bone man, a kind of urban scavenger, leaning on a stick as he passes in front of an alpine landscape.
less a portrait than a genre image, the feathery brushwork and sunlight-dappled surface of the picture, situates afternoon tea soundly in the impressionist style for which she is best known. here, bracquemond has once again represented her sister, louise.
apparently, while he was quick to criticize her work, flix refused to consider constructive criticism from his wife. in this luminous portrait of bracquemond\'s only child, her son pierre seems to have inherited if not his mother\'s talent some of her zeal for making art.
also in a public collection, three women with umbrellas alludes to the artist\'s roots in academic classicism. its alternate title, the three graces, suggests that, despite her transition to the radical new impressionist style, bracquemond was conscious of the longstanding tradition of drawing from themes rooted in classical mythology.
bracquemond\'s woman in the garden reveals her roots in academic painting. in fact, the "lady in white" or "woman in white" became a popular theme for the impressionist painters.
in a letter to stieglitz, de zayas enthusiastically explained that apollinaire was "doing in poetry what picasso is doing in painting.  de zayas corresponded with the dadaists in europe, and sent them copies of 291 that influenced their experimental poetry, he remained independent from their movement.'.
replacing the portrait subject with an assemblage of objects and formal components of line and color became a new genre of painting among the new york avant-garde. de zayas\'s abstract caricatures directly inspired the machine portraits of francis picabia, which became an important part of dada in america.
located at zuccotti park in the financial district of lower manhattan, joie de vivre rises up no less than 70 feet off the ground. in this work, however, di suvero waxes metaphoric.
as is the case with di suvero\'s sculptures, he creates angular compositions and counterpoints through diagonals. poland is a good example of di suvero\'s work from the 1960s in which he incorporated discarded industrial materials such as leftover lengths of i-beams and other found scrap steel.
at the time, di suvero approached many of his works intuitively. the precarious arrangement of the elements in untitled, animates them with gesture, which harks back to the gestural abstraction of the abstract expressionist action painters that di suvero was so fond of.
rothko was among several artists invited by joseph brummer to exhibit in paris at the galerie bonaparte in november 1936; crucifixion was one of the paintings included.  this work is signed rothkowitz, as he did not officially become rothko until 1940.'.
in 1969, rothko exhibited ten paintings at the sidney janis gallery; four darks in red were among those shown.  in this way, rothko imagined a kind of direct communion between himself and the viewer, one which might touch the viewer with a higher spirituality.'.
rothko showed eleven paintings at betty parsons gallery in the spring of 1949; no. 9 was among them.  far from being merely abstract forms, however, rothko believed these motifs were objects imbued with his life force - "organisms..with the passion for self-expression."'.
greek mythology was an important theme of rothko\'s work in the early 1940s. oedipus, who is said to have solved of the riddle of the sphinx, was his father\'s murderer and his mother\'s lover.
slow swirl at the edge of the sea is a representative example of rothko\'s surrealist period. rothko\'s all-over composition of muted colors, strange translucent figures, horizontal lines, angles, and swirls create a vibrant yet veiled picture of an obscure primeval landscape.
the black on grays were painted directly on white canvas and lacked the usual underpainting which rothko liked to "paint against." rothko invited many of the new york art world elite to his studio to view his latest, and what would be his last, series of paintings, the black on grays.
standing on the sandy beach, his body dominates the painting, filling the entire center of the canvas.  griffey points out that hartley daringly exhibited his private homosexual desires at a time when homosexuality was widely policed and criminalized.'.
inspired by the landscape and czanne\'s own rendering of it, hartley depicts mount sainte - victoire in this luscious landscape. importantly, hartley was not just looking at czanne\'s paintings but the physical landscape that czanne himself saw.
hartley\'s painting portrait of a german officer is replete with diamonds, triangles, circles, black and white lines, and rich shades of red, blue, green, and yellow. while hartley did not paint the physical likeness of his deceased friend, the symbols collaged together make an abstract portrait.
a large brown mountain occupies two-thirds of the canvas in the background of hartley\'s painting. this work is an important example of one of hartley\'s earliest series, the dark mountain paintings.
the outline of tall brown tree trunks and evergreen branches are barely visible in the flurry of loose brushstrokes that comprise hartley\'s winter chaos, blizzard. the shades of blue, pink, and white dabs of color that fill the rest of the canvas show the winter storm that envelops the tree-lined mountain landscape.
the far right depicts the other side of the drapes, framing a window in which we see a black-and-white scene of war. a black-and-white image of a woman, with haircut and dress typical of the late-1960s, cleans heavily brocaded gold drapes with a cream paisley design.
in this work, point and shoot, she continues her use of photomontage. in the early 2000s, rosler returned to her house beautiful series from the 1960s to further her investigation of war.
semiotics of the kitchen demonstrates rosler\'s skill working in the newly developing video art field of the time. in it, we see the artist walk into a kitchen, don an apron, and proceed to vocally identify kitchen objects in alphabetical order: a for apron, b for bowl, c for chopper, d for dish, etc.
woman with vacuum, or vacuuming pop art is another work of photomontage. surrounded by works of pop art, the woman smiles, happy to care for the space in which the art is hung.
 this work was also unusual for its time in its depiction of a well-bred woman performing a physically active (if still genteel) task.' in addition to capturing the life of domestic interiors, theaters, and opera houses, cassatt also trained her gaze on figures in paris\'s parks and gardens, some of the few public spaces where respectable women could move freely in society.
this canvas shows a stylish woman attending a daytime performance at the comedie-francaise, a famous theater in paris.  when cassatt exhibited in the loge in boston in 1878, one critic praised it by writing that cassatt\'s work "surpassed the strength of most men."'.
in this important work of her mature career, cassatt chose to portray a young girl alone in a domestic interior. cassatt also brings her own astute observations to the construction of this image.
cassatt\'s older sister, lydia, was one of the artist\'s favorite models. in this painting, lydia is seated in profile, with her gown and her face painted in the same loose, feathery brushstrokes as the background and the armchair that locks her diagonally posed figure into the asymmetrical composition.
by the turn of the century, cassatt was working almost exclusively with the subject of mothers and children, using professional models for her figures. cassatt was aware of this tradition in western art, but she subverted it in mother and child.
in april 1890, cassatt attended an exhibition of japanese colored woodcuts at the ecole des beaux-arts in paris. following this event, she decided to create a series of ten prints showing the life of a modern-day woman.
it depicts the moment adam and eve were cast out of the garden of eden after committing the original sin. one of the best-known scenes painted by masaccio, this fresco forms part of the cycle he painted in the brancacci chapel.
the intricate damask fabric held behind st anne may reference the likely patron of the panel, nofri buonamici, who was a weaver of silk. this seems a suitable setting for this painting focusing on the virgin and her mother st anne, as they were considered to be models for an ideal christian woman.
though the painting has a narrative subject, masaccio has focused on the harmonious arrangement of figures rather than the storyline. the technical excellence of this painting has been studied and sketched by countless artists, from michelangelo to philip guston.
it was commissioned by the vanni castellani family of florence and originally resided in the church of san lorenzo, before being moved to san giovenale. on the left wing are saint bartholomew and saint blaise, and on the right are saint antony and saint juvenal (or san giovenale), all of whom are identified by name labels in the inscription below.
the painting is known as the trinity due to its depiction of christ with god behind him, and the white dove of the holy spirit hovering between their heads. the perspective is so accurate that modern scholars have been able to digitally construct the fictional space depicted in the painting as a 3d model.
vlaminck paints a satirical caricature of a woman sitting at a bar as a means of exposing the problem of prostitution and alcoholism in capitalist society. her reddish nose is visual shorthand for alcoholism, which is emphasized by the oversized red glass on the bar.
vlaminck lived and worked for over a decade in the small town, chatou. this painting captures a view from the le de chatou in the seine river, which also runs through paris.
although vlaminck later railed against cubism, this painting suggests that he was interested enough in the style to experiment with it. the figure\'s expressive facial features are reminiscent of the primitive tribal sculptures and african masks vlaminck purchased in 1902, influencing the cubist movement and the artists associated with it.
like her counterpart in the manet painting, vlaminck\'s reclining nude confronts the viewer with her powerful, unwavering gaze. another of vlaminck\'s works that explore the world of prostitution and dancehall entertainers, reclining nude represents a modern take on a classical subject: the female nude.
this work, a representation of a dancer at a bohemian parisian nightclub called le rat mort (the dead rat), seems to elude categorization as a portrait. according to art historian carol duncan, the fauves\' unconventional style and themes were reflective of their anarchist sentiments.
this landscape painting represents a view from the riverbank looking toward a bridge at bezons between chatou and argenteuil. it is possible that, argues klein, vlaminck "may have felt estranged from many of the temporary middle-class inhabitants and the supporting labor that served them.".
in this work, set in the shop of the art dealer ambroise vollard, a group of painters discusses paul czanne\'s seminal work still life with fruit-dish (1880). paintings by two other older painters - paul gauguin and pierre-auguste renoir - hang on the walls of the shop.
between the trees flit mysterious, robed figures; a winged figure in white can be made out behind the background barrier. at the same time, the piece expresses denis\'s unique interest in representing themes of christian love.
denis explored this subject across six different works, this painting, from 1889, being the second and most famous of them. in fra angelico\'s work, denis noted, "lighting is diffused", "daylight is white", and "shadows are non-existent" - we can see similar tonal affects at work in his own painting.
the jamot monument is exemplary of denis\'s later body of work in its devotion to religious themes. the work was commissioned by paul jamot, art historian and curator of the louvre, who wanted a monument for his wife madeleine, who had died prematurely in 1913.
sunlight on the terrace was never exhibited, as denis considered it the document of an experiment rather than a finished work. however, the title guides the viewer to interpret the work as showing a sunlit terrace: more specifically, the painting depicts the seventeenth-century terrace of the chateau de saint-germain-en-laye, where denis was living at the time of composition.
the shapes, colors, and facial expressions depicted, that is, indicate denis\'s underlying concern with capturing the invisible world of moral ideas and spiritual sensations in the outward appearance of his subjects. in this sense, the two sisters indicates a general stylistic trend within french painting of the 1880s-90s.
along the seine was created during prendergast\'s first trip to paris where he was exposed to a wide range of new artistic styles. the fashionably dressed woman strolling along the river provides an early example of prendergast\'s focus on leisure activities and portrayals of clothing.
prendergast toured italy during the period 1911-12 and this resulted in a burst of activity. the canal is an important example of how his italian works focused heavily on the architecture of the cities he visited.
the loosely rendered figures in this work are characteristic of prendergast\'s later style in which color and form became more important than realism. rich in symbolism, as well as references to classical imagery, this painting highlights prendergast\'s command of art history and his deep understanding of european artists and works.
this is one of a number of works prendergast created based on sights he saw during a trip to st malo, france in 1907.   prendergast selected paintings from the st malo series to display in \'the eight\' exhibition of 1908.'.
this work provides a fine example of the crowd scenes that prendergast often painted, in this instance a sunny afternoon on a massachusetts beach. prendergast painted extensively in new england depicting the social spaces of beaches and parks.
composer hector berlioz and his wife lived in the house between 1834 to 1837, long before utrillo came to paint it. another montmartre landmark, the berlioz house was located on the corner of the rue du mont-cenis and rue saint-vincent.
this painting features a view of a deserted place du tertre, a usually lively public square at the top of the hill of montmartre. it is known, however, that the artist based many compositions on postcard images, particularly as he grew older and less inclined to go out in public.
once again, the influence of impressionism - particularly monet\'s cathedrals - is revealed in his work. in 1895, monet\'s rouen cathedral series had been displayed at the gallery of paul durand-ruel in paris and he is very likely to have seen it.
v.," the latter referencing his mother\'s name, was inscribed on the stretcher by petrids: "peint pour moi par utrillo, dcembre 1940, achet chez paul petrids..." ("painted for me by utrillo, december 1940, purchased by paul petrids..."). in 1927, the young cypriot, paul petrids, moved to paris.
in this work, a taxidermy squirrel lays slumped over a miniature kitchen table with two miniature chairs. many, like tom eccles, former director of the public art fund, find cattelan\'s work particularly effective because of the use of humor to explore dark issues.
cattelan also says of the piece, "i wanted to destroy it myself. another hyperrealist sculpture, him depicts a petite, kneeling adolf hitler in a grey suit, gazing upward, hands interlaced in front of him, in a pose suggestive of seeking forgiveness.
the donkey was a symbol of peace, an alternative to the horse, which was more associated with war. according to debord, the advent of mass media and advertising around the 1920s, caused people to become more transfixed by commodities and their representation, "images detached from every aspect of life," as a distraction, or substitute for, real life.
this work consists of a life-sized sculpture of pope john paul ii lying on a red carpet, clutching the papal cross, and being crushed by a meteor. the original installation at the kunsthalle basel was located directly under a shattered skylight, with shards of glass around the fallen pope.
two of the horses are artist\'s proofs from cattelan\'s 2007 work untitled, and the other three are 2007 untitled pieces, on loan from various private collections around the world.  like malaparte\'s horses in finland that run away from the burning wood into the frozen lake, cattelan\'s horses do not seek freedom but survival."'.
one of the first paintings completed after his military service during world war i, adam and eve bears little resemblance to his prewar landscapes or large-scale narratives. the muddy tones similarly demonstrate beckmann\'s shift towards moralizing images, in which every element, even the color of the paint, bears deeper meaning.
this scene was inspired by an episode from beckmann\'s youth in which he was reprimanded for passing drawings to his friends in class. originally entitled "childhood," this painting is the most personally allegorical of beckmann\'s triptychs.
beckmann began painting departure just before the nazis came to power, and completed the work shortly after they deposed him from his teaching post in frankfurt. in the left panel, beckmann represented several figures in a torture chamber with their hands bound, forced to submit to unspeakable acts of violence.
painted shortly after his mother\'s death from cancer, small death scene not only recalls the artist\'s own experience of grief and mourning, but also bears the influence of the psychologically-laden work of the expressionist edvard munch. instead, beckmann reveals an individualized rendition of a group of mourners through the juxtaposition of highly contrasting tones of red, white, and black.
executed when he was only 21, young men by the sea demonstrates the young artist\'s solid academic training and thorough visual understanding of the body. despite the traditional nature of the work, beckmann was able to connect his training with his own love of the sea.
 through this work, ernst questions which is the "real" world - that of night-time and dreams - or that of the waking state.' ernst\'s painting demonstrates his indebtedness to freudian dream theory with its odd juxtapositions of disparate objects.
in this other-worldly canvas, ernst has painted an evocation of a vast apocalypse. seen within the context of 20th century european history, europe after the rain ii bears testimony to the insurmountable reign of warfare that devastated europe at the time.
the title, here everything is still floating, does not appear to connect with the image in any meaningful way, except that the objects appear floating in the air. through the medium, ernst created a new world where randomness and illogic expressed the insanity of wwi and threw bourgeois sensibilities into question.
this fantastical creature, with arms and legs extended, appears to be leaping with a garish, yet joyous, expression on its face. fireside angel is one of the rare works by ernst that was inspired directly by world political events.
similar to fellow dadaist marcel duchamp, ernst fancied chess playing as an art form unto itself. earlier, in 1929, ernst first modeled chess pieces that he turned into sculptures; he designed and executed several complete chessboards as well.
 although ernst painted from his own life and rendered personal symbols, he successful conveys the terror of dreams that is universal.' a second female, similarly painted in just grey and white tones, collapses on the ground as if fainted.
his father, morris weber, left the family for america when max was five years old. as a child in the jewish town of bialystock, weber\'s early memories were centered in old world religious iconography and tradition.
the chinese restaurant became part of bohemian social experiences and was doubtlessly part of weber\'s world. harnessing the energy of cubist abstraction, weber\'s painting conveys not only these details of a chinese restaurant, but conjures the bustling atmosphere and quick pace of urban life.
weber\'s still life incorporates elements of cubism through the flattened pictorial space and multiple points of view. weber adopts the nearly monochromatic palette of early cubism, as well, which furthers adds to the confusion of spatial depth.
according to the artist, her objective in this 12-foot-high 1,600-foot-long curving line of earth was to make a three-dimensional drawing. it is a visible source of inspiration for this work, part drawing, part sculpture, which lin describes as, "somewhere between a line and a walk.".
 in blurring the boundaries between inside and outside space, the work is designed to raise awareness of the environment, even in a major metropolitan center.' there are olive trees on the inside of the building and indigenous river birch on the outside.
lin selected a particular wave type that brought together all areas she had been researching, including fluid dynamics, flight resistance, and turbulence. literally part of the ground on which the artist designed it, this delightful sculpture is at once playful and intellectual.
a vietnam veteran can go to maya lin\'s memorial and search for the names of his fallen comrades. in relation to a war that was wildly unpopular both at home and abroad, lin\'s memorial was a barometer of these sentiments.
consistent with lin\'s interest in evoking landscape and transforming interior space, water line reveals part of the earth that was inaccessible in its entirety.  always drawn to nature, as a mature artist, lin has gravitated to sites of natural wonder, in works that seek to highlight the extraordinary fragility of earth\'s ecosystem.'.
our reflection bounces back to us from the rim of the silver tray, implicating us in a bizarre cannibalistic ritual. while the sexual references in djeuner en fourrure are subtle, this kicks it up a notch.
this fur-covered teacup, saucer, and spoon, covered in chinese gazelle pelt, is an unsettling hybrid: civilization meets wild animal. andr breton immediately saw the object as evidence of a fur fetish, and retitled the work dejeuner en fourrure (breakfast in fur) for his 1936 exposition surraliste d\'objet.
hands and gloves were a key surrealist motif, and of particular interest to oppenheim, who produced a series of gloves in the 1930s. working from sketches made in the early 1930s in paris, oppenheim screen printed fine red veins onto grey goat-skin suede and signed them inside with black ink.
oppenheim set the table with cutlery, inviting the spectator to a cannibal feast. breton called it cannibal feast, renaming it in a manner that emphasized the violence of the act.
one of his most important works, double negative is a pioneering work of earth or land art, marking the beginning of this distinctly american movement. heizer created this sculpture purely through the act of subtraction.
 the new ways of seeing the earth that levitated mass affords are very much in line with the basic tenets of the genre michael heizer created.' levitated mass is a permanent installation on the grounds of the los angeles county museum of art.
heizer indeed documented munich depression in a 360-degree photographic panorama, taken from inside the pit. beyond the perceptual aspects, participants who experienced munich depression were invited to think about their personal relationship to the land and sky.
begun in 1972 and still under construction, the city - as its name suggests - has become an entire landscape onto itself. in so doing, it demonstrates a unifying of past and present where the minimalistic, abstract ideals of modern art enmesh with the spirit and ceremony of ancient complexes.
 art historian claire mccoy said of the sculpture, "bacchus marked a moment when originality and imitation of the antique came together."' this statue of bacchus depicts the greek god of wine precariously perched on a rock in a state of drunkenness.
 a fully clad replica of david by andrea del verrocchio, a florentine contemporary of michelangelo, was donated instead.' during the early renaissance, donatello had revived the classical nude as subject matter and made a david of his own.
holy family, the only finished panel painting by the artist to survive, was commissioned by agnolo doni for his marriage to maddalena strozzi, daughter of a powerful tuscan family, which gives it its name. the round (tondo) form was customary for private commissions and michelangelo designed the intricate gold carved wooden frame.
this was the first of a number of piets michelangelo worked on during his lifetime. mary was a common subject, portrayed in myriad ways, and in this piece michelangelo presented her not as a woman in her fifties, but as an unusually youthful beauty.
piet rondanini is the last sculpture michelangelo worked on in the weeks leading up to his death, finalizing a story that weaved through his many pietas and now reflective of the artist\'s reckoning with his own mortality.  the italian artist massimo lippi is quoted as saying that modern and contemporary art began with this piet, and the south african painter, marlene dumas, based her homage to michelangelo (2012) on this work.'.
as reflected in the title, bed resembles the familiar furniture item and is comprised of a thin mattress resting on a six-legged metal frame. pistoletto wanted to develop a "sign" or shape for his art that could apply to a various common objects made in a variety of different materials.
quandro da pranzo (lunch painting) consists of a wooden frame containing simple geometric renderings of two life-size wooden chairs and a table, which, when hung, allows the gallery wall to be incorporated into the painting.  challenging notions of what is or could be art, this work and the minus objects are considered fundamental to the arte povera movement and would become one of pistoletto\'s most important bodies of work.'.
tre ragazze alla balconata (three girls on a balcony) is one of a series of paintings on reflective materials that artist michelangelo pistoletto began working with starting in 1961. to create their work, artists associated with this movement used commonplace materials, such as clothing, rocks, and, in the case of pistoletto, oil and pencil on tissue paper.
venus of the rags, pistoletto\'s iconic large-scale sculpture, consists of a classically rendered figure of the goddess venus staring into a colorful mound of rags and discarded clothing. in this work, the traditionally rendered marble venus pays homage to the rich cultural history of ancient roman culture.
a staple of michelangelo pistoletto\'s work is performance. while for some artists this is a solitary exercise, for pistoletto it is most often a collaborative act involving individuals from diverse artistic disciplines.
this was an innovative depiction of the creation of adam. as a result the viewer\'s eye is drawn to the hands of god and adam, outlined in the central space, almost touching.
the saved souls rise from their graves on the left helped by angels. michelangelo, angry at the remark, is said to have painted cesena\'s face onto minos, judge of the underworld, with donkey\'s ears.
in this work, ukeles uses black and white, artistic photography techniques to show us her everyday life as a mother. expanding on her maintenance art manifesto, ukeles began exploring maintenance as art by documenting her labour in the home and as a mother, including everyday, repetitive tasks like cleaning a dirty diaper or dressing her children to leave the house.
in later work, ukeles extended her practice to encompass maintenance tasks outside of the home, in art institutions and the public sphere more broadly.  like earlier work, i make maintenance art one hour every day makes visible otherwise hidden and essential labour, which is otherwise rarely respected as important work done by diligent workers.'.
landing is an intervention in the earth which is specifically made to be accessible and enjoyable for people living in staten island. ukeles was critical of other works in the land art movement, as many of them are difficult to reach and experience.
speaking about leaving the school and these early works she says, "i almost fell apart. this work is one of several sculptures that ukeles made while attending the pratt institute.
building on her work with maintenance workers, ukeles met with over 8500 employees of the new york sanitation department for touch sanitation. in order to assist the artist, the sanitation department provided her with a driver and a guide for the entire year.
the resonance of "youth" in the work\'s title is, as in many of kelley\'s works, left up to his audience to fathom. ahh...youth! is a group of eight cibachrome prints of mug-shot photographs, seven showing stuffed and knitted animals, and the eighth a youthful, harshly lit image of kelley himself, taken from a high school yearbook.
before his death, kelley intended to create an extensive video series consisting of 365 parts representing the days in a year. in a series ultimately composed of 37 parts, day is done is a compilation of parts 2 through 32, totalling 32 video chapters.
this is our presumption ... that all motivation is based on some repressed trauma." educational complex was created as a result of kelley\'s embrace of this pseudo-biography as well as his interest in repressed memory syndrome, a form of amnesia that results from a traumatic or stressful event.
mobile homestead is the last work kelley created before his death and was completed posthumously. when anchored at its permanent site, however, the mobile homestead connects to an underground complex - a windowless basement that is restricted to artists alone.
more love hours than can ever be repaid marks the first time that kelley used stuffed-animal toys as a medium. more love hours was first exhibited at the rosamund felsen gallery in los angeles with a companion sculpture, the wages of sin, an assembled shrine of homemade candles set atop a table and placed to the left of the wall hanging.
nostalgic depiction of the innocence of childhood depicts a naked man and woman squatting over stuffed animals in sexual positions, creating what kelley called a "fake pornographic" image. in nostalgic depiction of the innocence of childhood, the abject, sexually aggressive activity of the two figures seems to point further still, towards the subversion of high art\'s traditional effacement of base, bodily pleasures.
in the banana man, kelley explores the possibilities for suggesting individual character by way of the slightest of cues. while the show was familiar to kelley from his youth, he had never himself witnessed the banana man on screen.
in this large painting avery has three sections of pure color: an inky black sea at the top of the canvas, a small band of frothy white waves, and vast spread of warm taupe sand. avery not only reduces painting to its essence but also nature to its essence - a wave is always an undulating form; the sand and sea are flat expanses.
from the studio is a much-lauded avery piece, featured prominently in the artist\'s 1960 retrospective at the whitney and, according to auction house heritage, is "a reflection of avery coming into the fullness of his career ." there is a subject here - a figure sitting just outside an artist\'s studio - but in actuality, the subject is color and light, their gradations and subtlety.
without the title to guide the viewer, red rock falls appears almost completely abstract. here he paints red rock falls, a popular destination in glacier national park, montana, in perhaps the least representational terms for what is ostensibly a landscape painting.
steeplechase exemplifies avery\'s early work and pays homage to the city he made his home. critics often deem avery\'s work a fusion of the traditional and the modern, and this work exemplifies that assessment.
bringing together "high" and "low" artistic production, anatomy of a kimono consolidated multiple aspects of schapiro\'s artistic and political ambitions. this was a political gesture of strength and determination to gain recognition and acceptance for different modes of artistic production.
beast land and plenty is a large-scale, non-figurative work. part of the second generation of abstract expressionist painters in new york, here schapiro embraces the raw, emotional energy of this style.
rich with metaphor, schapiro intended the dollhouse as a statement on the lives of women.  when dollhouse was placed in womanhouse, it acted as a "house within a house" and further reinforced the message of the larger work.'.
drawing from her familiy\'s heritage, mother russia connects schapiro\'s feminist concerns and traditional forms of "woman\'s work" with a history of female artists from russia. from 1910 to 1920, female russian artists took active roles in the russian revolution and helped shape soviet culture, but they were quickly forgotten or overshadowed by their male colleagues.
shrine for two paint tubes depicts a vertical black column in the center of a cream-colored rectangular canvas, against which rises a curved tower-like structure with four framed sections. schapiro created a series of shrine works that utilize symbols such as the tower and window shapes and the egg and fruit to create a visual account of the life of a female artist.
dalet kaf is an example of louis\'s later veil paintings. in order to work within the small confines of his studio, louis would staple canvas to the walls.
delta theta is a classic work from louis\'s unfurled series, which are among the most recognizable works of his oeuvre. for this painting, louis folded the massive, mural-sized canvas (nearly 20 feet wide) before pouring the thinned acrylic down its surface.
partition is one of louis\'s so-called stripe series, all executed in the last months of his life. the stripe canvases demonstrate louis\'s increasingly stripped-down approach to composition and form.
good morning mr. in order to realize his vision of a borderless world and to showcase the possibility that art could bring the world together as one, paik produced his first major international satellite broadcast good morning mr.
the screens show smaller clips in an array of disparate real world images from the seoul olympics to korean folk rituals to modern dance. the artist may be suggesting that our bodies are our primal connection to the world, but like the lone screen we are surrounded by "too much information.".
tv bra for living sculpture was performed by moorman as part of the groundbreaking group exhibition "tv as a creative medium" at the howard wise gallery in new york. tv brassiere for living sculpture (charlotte moorman) is also one sharp example to humanize electronics ... and technology.
the success of tv buddha (1974) triggered a series of similar works by paik. later variations of the work include stone buddha/burnt tv (1982), which features a buddha observing a burned television without any electronic power, tv buddha (1982), featuring a buddha contemplating a monitor covered by a mound of dirt, and tv rodin (1982), which places a miniature reproduction of rodin\'s the thinker on top of a sony watchman.
the background of the portrait looks outside the car\'s windows, capturing other nyc taxis sharing a busy street. in this portrait, two drag queens sit in the back of a taxi.
in this photograph, nan goldin sits with her lover, brian, on a bed. in nan and brian in bed, new york city, both nan, the artist and female protagonist, and the viewer are looking at brian\'s naked back.
serving as a backdrop, which is multiplied in the bathroom mirror\'s reflection, the blue tiles take up most of the image. the geometric shapes are only broken up by goldin\'s face sitting in the bottom corner of the mirror.
the one of the right is an older photograph goldin took, with the image on the left a photograph she took of a painting in the louvre. goldin then created a side-by-side comparison, in this work capturing the intertwined bodies in a "swan-like embrace.".
the subject, valerie, floats naked in the water, her head tilted back, eyes closed, mouth open, basking in the sun. this portrait photograph captures an ecstatic moment of weightlessness.
graves said that she used this layering effect to "simulate the layers of human history". while graves\'s interests in natural history and the documentation of nature were constants throughout her career, they were not always her sole points of reference.
her life-size mixed media camels sculpture was the star of this show, capturing the imagination of visitors and critics alike. nancy graves\' 1969 solo exhibition at the whitney was critically and popularly acclaimed.
towards the end of her career, nancy graves worked most prominently with cast metal sculptures. this playful sculpture questions the presence of the human between the natural world and the modern man-made world.
she made several films on this trip, including izy boukir, a 20-minute piece examining the movement of camel herds, their behavior, and interactions. graves said she wanted to "permit the animal motions to determine structure....
nancy graves\' art continued to draw on themes and motifs of mapping, movement, abstraction, scientific documentation, and of course, camels. for the 1980 print vertigo, graves drew on satellite maps of the moon and the sea floor, alongside her own observations of camel herd movement patterns in morocco in the 1970s.
the experience of dark star park is one of contrast. while displaying none of the signs (figures on horseback, obelisks, etc.), or even a title that would identify it as such, dark star park is a historical monument.
in the 1980s, environmental concerns entered directly into holt\'s work. in employing materials one might more readily find in a basement or control room, raising the question "is it or isn\'t it" (art), pipeline reflects holt\'s longstanding engagement with conceptual art.
mimicking minimalist sculpture (and perhaps specifically the work of carl andre), western graveyards turns graves into sculptures. delineating the grave and preserving it as a work of art, holt\'s camera performs a similar action in her series, western graveyards, which includes the two works shown here.
indeed, the figure at the centre of the universe depicted by spero in this work appears, upon closer inspection, to be a black woman or man. a cycle of the universe is finished - artaud forms part of a larger project that spero undertook between 1969 and 1972, only four years after relocating to nyc from paris, and throughout which she engaged in a complicated dialogue with the writings of french playwright and poet antonin artaud.
nancy spero\'s lovers i belongs to a series of twenty-five works known as the black paintings, for the most part produced between 1961 and 1965, while the artist was living in paris.  even when simply depicting herself and her love, spero suggests a harking back to the origins that we all share.'.
south africa from 1981 is one of many works to come out of such a practice of spero\'s interest in the ancient feminine. from 1976 onwards, the story of women became nancy spero\'s main preoccupation as an artist.
made in 1971, they will torture you, my friend is the result of a collaboration between nancy spero and her long-life partner and figurative painter leon golub. although nancy uses the print process to repeat a particular form, she has a remarkable capacity for giving a unique figure a range of representations.".
indeed, many installation works of the late 1980s and 1990s, really do emphasize the freedom that women have won through their trials and tribulations.  the view of life that spero proposes in this work is one more spiritual than most, presenting an everyday imbued with celestial lightness and infinite possibility.'.
black and white rays of feline form splinter into shards and intersect with light rays on a primarily yellow ground. two cats play, or fight, as a simple domestic subject is used to illustrate the complex new rayonism art movement.
whilst creating costumes for the spanish ballet, triana, she focused on traditional national folk dress. a number of these designs, including the orange vendor, later became oil paintings.
showing two women and two men, dancing a round dance, on green earth with a dark blue sky behind them, peasants dancing is part of the vintage: composition in nine parts that contains paintings depicting the grape harvest. the series was paired with the harvest: composition in nine parts, nine paintings that contained images from the book of revelation.
indeed, goncharova painted pillars of salt the previous year, illustrating the story of lot\'s wife, who looked back at the destroyed city of sodom after being told not to. as the women are picking apples and there exists one male/female couple, the biblical story of adam and eve is evoked.
whilst van gogh chose the sunflower as his signature bloom, goncharova identifies instead with lilies. this, however, was always a white lily and goncharova chooses an orange alternative perhaps making reference to her own sexual experience.
a cyclist races down a cobblestoned street in front of a modern commercial thoroughfare displaying billboards and street signs. the cyclist speeds ahead, and his peaked workers\' cap transforms his head into a rounded shape similar to that of the cobblestones.
in one of goncharova\'s works devoted to a solely religious subject, the artist depicts the four evangelists of the gospels. in the same way that frida kahlo left the scrolls of some of her retablos blank, goncharova refuses to give written words to follow.
the woman of the picture is bent double picking up firewood, whilst the men are stooped beneath their burdens. this work, showcasing a typical neo-primitivist interest in folk life was shown at the 1912 donkey\'s tail exhibition. \'donkey\'s tail\' was the title of the group that goncharova and larinov were part of revealing their interest in the base, simple and lowly aspects of life.
constructed head no. 2 is one of a set of early figurative works by gabo now seen to have revolutionized sculpture. in generating the impression of volume in empty space, gabo was responding to contemporary scientific theories stressing the "disintegration between solids and surrounding space".
later versions of kinetic construction were more complex, incorporating a switch button, and built from more sophisticated materials. kinetic construction was devised partly to demonstrate the aesthetic concepts proclaimed in gabo and pevsner\'s realistic manifesto.
kinetic stone carving represents a major shift from the constructivist process of assembling individual elements which gabo had helped to define earlier in the century. ives, it is one of a number of stone works from this period which represent gabo\'s first experiments with the time-honoured technique of direct carving.
linear construction in space, another work created during gabo\'s time in st. by using nylon, a new, synthetic material whose elasticity, smoothness and translucency defined the feel of this sculpture, gabo again demonstrated his engagement his interest in using new, man-made compositional materials.
an elegant public artwork constructed from curved, stainless steel plates, designed for installation in a pool of water, revolving torsion represents the culmination of principles of kinetic art first explored over 50 years earlier by gabo\'s kinetic construction. like lots of gabo\'s later, large-scale public works, revolving torsion is the final realization of a theme previously expressed across a range of scales and materials, in this case as various plastic and metal models created from the late 1920s onwards: model for torsion (circa 1928), torsion: project for a fountain (1960-64), etcetera.
drawing inspiration from his natural surroundings - a relatively new creative approach for gabo - and from a series of photographs he had made that summer of light patterns reflected from shiny surfaces, gabo created the first maquette for spiral theme. one of four models made in anticipation of two larger sculptures, spiral theme is a curvilinear, transparent construction with a central vertical element, reminiscent of the shells gabo found on the beaches around st.
black venus, black madonna, black men, black nanas. black venus is one of several black nanas (french slang term for woman; like chick or broad) saint phalle made during this period, as a statement of solidarity with the civil rights movement.
this work responds to the genre-blending of mid-century abstraction, and is definitive of saint phalle early feminist works. in perfectly calibrated formal choices, de saint phalle disfigured long-held articles of faith - high art, the family, the church.".
this work is saint phalle\'s largest nana figure.  the scale of this work also inspired saint phalle to begin working on a more architectural scale, culminating in her sculpture (and actually a home that one can live in) the empress.'.
this is the last project niki de saint phalle worked on before her death. when saint phalle was invited to turn the space into an immersive art environment, she created a design in response to the formal qualities of the existing architecture.
in 1961, niki de saint phalle held an exhibition at galerie j entitled "fire at will." on show were several of her tirs or shooting paintings (tir is the french word for "shooting" or "to fire"), including this one.
in the last years of his life and career, lewis returned to vibrant and hard edge painting such as above.  the repetition of circles suggests the pulsating sounds of music - here, blues, jazz, and bebop - filling the night air.'.
despite lewis\'s disavowl of protest paintings and social realism, the artist continued to confront social issues throughout his career - although mediated through abstract expressionism. the abstract, hooded white figures which emerge from the greyish background are members of the hateful ku klu klan, who gather around a bonfire at center.
large totemic elements give way to human figures which are shown crowded together. lewis has again woven together abstract elements with social implications, namely, the inner city and its crowded environment.
in 1955, norman lewis became the first african-american artist to receive the carnegie international award for this celebrated painting. the critic for the new york herald-tribune proclaimed lewis\'s work "one of the most significant events of the 1955 art year.".
however, lewis\'s black paintings (1946-77) were rarely given over entirely to the color black, unlike reinhardt\'s later black canvases of the 1950s. throughout his career, the artist worked extensively with black, which intriqued him for both its formal properities and social implications.
the yellow hat shows lewis\'s style in transition from social realism to abstraction. lewis subdivides the figure and ground into planar shapes of distinct colors; the yellow hat which shields the woman\'s face is the brightest note of color.
this is one of several portraits that redon painted of the wife of his friend and patron, the baron de domecy. in contrast to her monochromatic face, the baronne\'s vivid red blouse suggests a more passionate soul than her reserved demeanor would indicate.
redon described his flowers as being "at the confluence of two riverbanks, that of representation and that of memory." the many floral still lifes that redon created at the end of his career are among his most popular and recognizable works, and have been widely reproduced.
a man\'s head emerges from a flowerpot, his neck rising upward like the stalk of a strange hybrid plant. the drawing may be related to an exhibition redon saw in paris in 1881 featuring the inhabitants of the tierra del fuego.
the motif of closed eyes appealed to redon, for whom the symbol evoked mystery, dream, meditation, and the interior life. this painting depicts a figure with closed eyes, bare shoulders and a tight helmet of dark hair, seeming to rise out of the sea.
a large head held aloft by wings floats above a tranquil sea, gazing upon a small sailboat with enormously expressive eyes. with its realistic depiction of dreamlike imagery, the guardian spirit of the waters anticipates 20th-century surrealism.
given complete freedom on the project, redon created two large panels, day and night, for the two walls, and a smaller panel over the doorway. in the panels redon retrospectively contemplates his own oeuvre, as day evokes his color period and night looks back upon his "noirs.".
instead of a basket containing passengers, the balloon carries a severed head on a platter, much like that of st. an eyeball has morphed into a strange balloon, its gaze directed toward the heavens as it rises above the horizon.
a strange smiling spider with ten legs is the subject of redon\'s lithograph.  it is the recognition of our humanity in these strange hybrid creatures - the goofy, toothy grin on a fuzzy spider - that makes them so appealing and repellant at the same time.'.
another piece, glacial rock flour garden, consisted of 150 tons of granite rock imported from greenland, which had been ground down by glacial erosion. in 2016, eliasson was invited to create a site-specific installation at the chateau de versailles.
unlike his previous sculptural work, which sought to inspire a relationship between participants and an irrelevant space; green river sought to make a more meaningful connection between participants and the space they inhabit daily. his first landscape intervention was green river, a guerilla-style piece, in which he covertly changed the color of rivers in various cities by treating them with a harmless green dye used by biologists to track water currents.
as the large ice blocks stoically sat melting, visitors were encouraged to touch them and feel the physical reality of time passing alongside climate change. ice watch is a recent work in which the artist called attention to a global environmental crisis with the hope of spurring the concepts of personal responsibility and positive change in viewers.
in conceiving the little suns, eliasson created not only a useful work of art, but also a humanitarian one. his team encourages off-grid entrepreneurs to start their own small businesses selling little suns by providing them with starter kits and training.
in his most celebrated large-scale installation, the weather project, eliasson transformed the massive turbine hall at london\'s tate modern into a captivating artificial environment. using a simple assemblage of 200 mono-frequency bulbs arranged in a semi circle and reflected onto a mirrored ceiling, eliasson created a giant fake sun of dazzling pseudo-radiance.
ventilator, his most celebrated early work, was a subtle kinetic sculpture first shown at the museum of modern art in new york. like beauty before it, eliasson\'s early works were typically sculptural structures built specifically for a space within a museum or gallery.
with this work eliasson also strives to enhance the viewer\'s experience by means of dramatic visual impact through a unique interpretation of light. eliasson\'s interest in immersive large-scale installations and fascination with structure and form naturally led his progression into architectural works, and your rainbow panorama successfully blurs the lines between art and architecture.
abstract composition, one of rozanova\'s last works, illustrates her theory of what she called "transfigured color far from utilitarian goals".  works such as abstract composition thus not only stand for a particular, pivotal moment in the development of early-20th-century avant-garde art, but also stand at the forefront of a whole century of abstract painting.'.
rozanova\'s 1914 painting metronome was shown at the the last futurist exhibition 0,10 in petrograd in 1915, alongside such legendary works as malevich\'s black square. like both the futurists and the cubists, rozanova integrates text into her work, arranged in this case in diagonal and curved lines spreading upwards across the canvas.
collage-based works such as non-objective composition were the precursor to rozanova\'s later painterly abstractions. rozanova\'s collage-work anticipates her later suprematist work in its incorporation of simple, non-representational shapes such as arcs and rectangles.
the playing cards series represents a critical step on rozanova\'s path towards pure abstraction. this work is part of rozanova\'s eleven-painting cycle playing cards, described by nina gurianova as having "no counterpart in either russian or european painting.".
this painting is, as its title suggests, a good example of the late work which rozanova produced in conjunction with the suprematist movement. but rozanova\'s approach to suprematism is distinguished by its emphasis on the vibrancy and interaction of color, an emphasis which might call to mind the expressionist paintings of wassily kandinsky.
the i am still alive series might seem devoid of meaningful input from the artist himself. another series executed over many years, i am still alive consists of a series of telegrams sent intermittently over a thirty-year period to a wide range of recipients, including figures within the art world, bearing the message "i am still alive".
some critics refer to i got up as one of kawara\'s most personal projects. every day between 1968 and 1979, kawara sent postcards to two different recipients, hand-stamped with a message informing them of the time at which he had got up that morning (or afternoon).
if kawara met someone at midnight, they would appear both at the end of the previous day\'s list and at the start of the next one. while i met documents the artist\'s interactions with other people, the emotional detachment of the record-keeping method is what really defines the piece.
the i read series consists of a set of grey binders filled with annotated clippings from the newspapers which kawara read over a period of almost thirty years. the pages of the i read binders are not only organized by date, but also inscribed with numeric codes corresponding to the relevant date paintings.
one million years consists of two books, one million years: past (for all those who have lived and died) and one million years: future (for the last one).  a past participant in a one million years performance, andrew russeth, has described the process as "meditative, surprisingly difficult, and quite melancholy."'.
thinking man is one of on kawara\'s earliest exhibited works. though an early work, and somewhat untypical of the artist, thinking man speaks to kawara\'s existential concerns.
title is also an important early example of conceptual art, a movement taking off in new york in the mid-1960s. title was produced at a time when the u.s. military was subjecting north vietnam to a massive bombing campaign.
december 17, 1979 is one of nearly 3,000 works produced over a span of almost fifty years as part of kawara\'s today series. in these ways, the today series is classic conceptual art, its idea-content, often informed by philosophy, more significant than its aesthetic content.
kokoschka depicts his subjects, prominent viennese art historians hans tietze and erica tietze-conrat who were supporters of contemporary art, not so much as they actually looked but how he understood their psyches.  one could point to a host of sources for modern man\'s feelings of alienation in society, and kokoschka vowed to render that alienation and anxiety visible.'.
as kokoschka later explained, "in their chaste forms and their inwardness, i seemed to find a rejection of the two-dimensionality of jugendstil. instead, kokoschka\'s stream-of-conscious narrative poem tells of the sexual awakening of a young, unnamed boy and the heroine li.
 kokoschka\'s sculpture and painting did everything in its power to discomfort and alarm.' created just a year after the dreaming boys, kokoschka\'s self-portrait as warrior declares his break with jugendstijl and decorative arts and affirms his commitment to an expressionistic art.
kokoschka said, "in the self-portrait of a degenerate artist i\'ve used only my own private perspective... because it\'s the expression of my whole being and only i can express my being as such." in the midst of painting this particular self-portrait, kokoschka learned that his works had been included in the nazi\'s degenerate art exhibition, a munich exhibition that strove to expose modern art\'s debasement of classical tradition and its decadence.
commissioned by fellow austrian migr, art historian, and collector count antoine seilern in 1949, kokoschka painted the three large panels of xxx. kokoschka felt that the triptych was the most important painting that he had created.
when oskar kokoschka and his lover alma mahler came back to vienna from a trip to italy in the spring of 1913, the rebel artist painted the walls of his studio black and started working on the tempest, or bride of the wind. yet, alma kept a small reproduction of the tempest in her apartment in new york, where she fled before the second world war.
in the summer of 1948, kokoschka and his wife traveled to venice in advance of the venice biennale, where kokoschka represented austria with several of his paintings. from his hotel room, he completed this panoramic, postcard scene of the san marco basin.
as a character of her time just as the woman herself, this image of sylvia von harden became iconic of the era. it is said that dix painted this portrait after seeing von harden in the street and exclaiming, "i must paint you, i simply must!.
dix created many self-portraits throughout his lifetime. his maturity as an artist and a man can be chronicled in these reflective and intense studies of his own image.
in response to the nazis\' dismissing him from his teaching post at the berlin academy, dix created this surreal satire on german politics. dix felt that this sloth or lack of concern and unwillingness to take early action by the german people had allowed hitler\'s rise to power.
showing both his dadaist and cubist influences, dix makes a clear social statement using his bold technique in this painting. the skat players are war veterans horribly disfigured and crippled by their service, yet they are still able to play cards.
the war shows men going into battle, it shows the aftermath of conflict, and it shows them returning from the field. dix was extremely affected by his war experiences and returned to them often for inspiration.
guernica was picasso\'s response to the bombing of the basque town of the same name on april 26, 1937 during the spanish civil war.  although guernica is undoubtedly modern art\'s most famous response to war, critics have been divided on its success as a painting.'.
when picasso\'s work came under the influence of the surrealists in the late 1920s, his forms often took on melting, organic contours.  it is thought that the picture represents the former dancer olga koklova, whose relationship with picasso was failing around this time.'.
in this work, picasso challenges the distinction between high art and popular culture, pushing his experiments in new directions. this is the first time that an artist so blatantly uses elements of popular culture in a work of high art.
gertrude stein was an author, close friend, and even supporter of picasso, and was integral to his growth as an artist. this portrait, in which stein is wearing her favorite brown velvet coat, was made just a year before les demoiselles d\'avignon, and marks an important stage in his evolving style.
the chair caning in the picture in fact comes from a piece of printed oilcloth - and not, as the title suggests, an actual piece of chair caning. still life with chair caning is celebrated for being modern art\'s first collage.
 in later years picasso dismissed his blue period works as "nothing but sentiment"; critics have often agreed with him, even though many of these pictures are iconic, and of course, now unbelievably expensive.' la soupe is characteristic of the somber melancholy of picasso\'s blue period, and it was produced at the same time as a series of other pictures devoted to themes of destitution, old age, and blindness.
picasso painted two version of this picture. however, another argument links the pictures to picasso\'s work for the ballets russes, and identifies the characters with more recent friends.
it appeared alongside eleven similar paintings in steir\'s kairos show at the lvy gorvy gallery in 2017. rather than mixing colors herself, steir layers the various colors directly on the canvas, with certain layers drying at different speeds, and therefore cracking to reveal the multiple layers of color underneath.
the artist described, "historically, each flower in a vanitas painting depicted a vanity, that is, an aspect of mortality." the style, however, is quite unusual as steir painted each individual canvas in a different artistic style, depending on the contents of that section.
this technique allowed steir to address several key concerns, including: nature, temporality, materiality, and illusionism. steir\'s waterfall paintings were equally influenced by her interest in chinese yipin, or "ink-splash" painting, introduced to her by a student of john cage.
steir created the rose paintings during the early 1970s, during her brief tenure teaching at the experimental calarts program. this work represents the early conflict between mimetic and expressionist forms of representation.
for this site-specific installation at the sue scott gallery in new york, steir moved from the canvas to the walls of the gallery.  steir embraces conceptualism by emphasizing the viewer\'s experience, rather than the painted object, as the true content of her work.'.
a pearly-skinned siren, or mermaid, bathed in moonlight lies on a plinth at the center of a city square, surrounded by classical architecture. the classical architecture, trees, and streetlamps are all arranged according to strict linear perspective, showing delvaux\'s interest in renaissance painting.
in the 1950s delvaux painted a series of religious paintings on the subject of the passion of christ, which had been a popular subject in medieval and renaissance art. either oblivious or indifferent to the shock these paintings would have on the public, delvaux submitted them to the 27th venice biennial in 1954.
in this late work, delvaux depicts an assortment of nude and clothed figures in a dark, glossy space reminiscent of a train station. in many ways, this painting is a convergence of delvaux\'s lifelong passions, as it includes many of his themes.
the prominent man in the bowler hat was based on a real man delvaux had observed in the street. by including this man in the painting, delvaux illustrates a certain apprehension.
the awakening of the forest was inspired by delvaux\'s childhood fascination with jules verne. a full silvery moon illuminates a forest where primal nude figures frolic, recline, climb trees, and play instruments.
unlike others who painted rural french subjects in the 1880s, gauguin chose to depict four breton girls in a field in no simple documentary, or realist manner.  faces, figures, clothing, and landscape each assume equal importance in this democratic arena, in which girls interlock their limbs as effortlessly as if they had originally grown that way.'.
this same painting also illustrates well how gauguin remained forever a child of the 19th century, while nonetheless functioning as a bellwether, or beacon, to a younger generation. most of his work remained rooted in the natural world around him, a legacy of his roots in impressionism.
the yellow christ is a strong example of both cloisonnism (a style characterized by dark contours and bright areas of color separated by bold outlines) and symbolism (in which subject matter is idealized or romanticized in some fashion).  it remains for the viewer to decide whether the vision is conjured in the minds of the pious or physically manifest in the contemporary landscape.'.
this double portrait is typical of gauguin\'s later work, much of which reflected the artist\'s deep love of nature. as gauguin\'s time in tahiti was coming to a close, he departed from his usual symbolist style in order to paint portraits of tahitian women, whose beauty, form, and lack of shame at their partial nudity (decidedly unlike many 19th-century european womens\' regard of the naked body) at once fascinated, attracted, and inspired him.
the german word for death, tod, makes up the features of the white face in the center of the picture, so powerfully, yet simply reminiscent of a human or an animal skull. perhaps a minimally described man walks toward death, or perhaps towards the glowing sun held in death\'s hand.
the bright light of tunisia inspired klee to create pictures of colorful watercolor washes.  klee suggests that color, shape, and the faintest suggestion of a subject are enough to powerfully re-create in the eye of the viewer the actual feeling of repose that the artist experienced in the original landscape.'.
consistently an artist who produced sometimes multiple preparatory drawings, including in color, prior to beginning a painting, signac made a number of sketches for lady on a terrace. by 1898 when signac produced this painting at his studio in saint-tropez, his approach to neo-impressionism had transformed from the experimental years of early 1880s.
when signac produced this work, the powerful influence of impressionism still exerted considerable force in terms of his style. this painting, produced in les andelys in upper normandy on the banks of the seine river, features the short brushstrokes and naturalistic palette of impressionist works.
the theme, a genre scene, a common choice for the impressionists and generations of artists before them was one favored by signac. this drawing is one of many finished works in media besides oil on canvas that signac produced throughout his very long career.
in this early work, the primarily self-taught signac is still struggling with the articulation of fictive space. signac\'s first major interior scene, the milliner takes up a subject often represented by the impressionists, including degas and cassatt.
in woman with a parasol, signac\'s companion stands serenely holding a bright-colored, orange umbrella and looking serenely to the right, beyond the picture plane. the theme, of a woman sheltering beneath an umbrella, was also a common one for the impressionist artists.
one can see this humanist philosophy in practice in his portrait of the young student, anna attinga frafra. however, the book, ghana: an african portrait, featuring a companion text by the africanist scholar basil davidson, was not published until 1976 (four years after the death of nkrumah).
strand believed that the furtive nature of authentic urban portraiture was both vital and morally justifiable: "i was attempting to give something to the world and not exploit anyone in the process" he said. her attention is drawn to an event outside the frame, and though she is blind, the photograph confirms that she is oblivious to the camera\'s close proximity.
through native land strand wanted to expose civil liberties violations in america during the 1930s. at the time of the film\'s release, the influential new york times film critic bosley crowther hailed native land as "one of the most powerful and disturbing documentary films ever made".
porch shadows exemplifies this way of working. during the summer of 1916, strand vacationed at a rented cottage in twin lakes, connecticut.
the lusetti family portrait is comprised of a mother and five of her eight sons; all of them wwii veterans. the lusetti family represents strand\'s late period (after he had resettled in europe) and features in his book un paese, portrait of an italian village, which was published in 1955.
wall street is an historically significant image, both for strand and for the development of photographic art. indeed, with wall street in particular, strand was shocked that he was able to get such a sharp image of the moving people considering how slow the plates took to process.
in combining both texts, rego explores the complexity that underlies a single narrative. this lithograph is taken from a series made in response to charlotte bronte\'s novel, jane eyre (1847).
dancing ostriches is one of a large series of paintings that rego made in which she depicted muscular, stocky women stretching and preparing their bodies for a ballet performance.  as in dog woman, rego depicts the female body as capable and strong; a body that asks not be judged, but to be accepted in its weighty, assured, and decidedly earthbound presence.'.
rego depicts two dancing couples, a dancing trio, and a much larger single figure to the side. though titled the dance, there is much more going on in this picture than a simple celebratory act.
this is an early example of rego\'s collage work. rego became interested in collage and large-scale painting from a young age, and began to combine at once abstract and figurative compositions with surrealist technique.
rego herself has said that the image is a response to photographs published in newspapers during the early days of the iraq war. indeed, in transforming people into animals, rego considers how we place sympathy and furthermore, what capacity we have to deal with extreme inhumanity.
in girlie door, blake recreates a universal scene that can be found in any common teenage boy\'s bedroom.  in blake\'s piece, we find a refreshing breath of innocence that brings to mind the semi-awkward wonder in burgeoning lust.'.
in this famous painting, blake combines images of ordinary, everyday people with a plethora of references to the theme "on the balcony." in fact, blake made many images of youths and children, tightly cropped and depicted head-on stares throughout the 1950s.
when peter blake left london at the end of the 1960s, he moved to the countryside and started painting in a very different style. to create this work, blake was extensively inspired by the victorians, and their interest in fairies and fairy tales.
this painting is a self-portrait, with blake depicting himself as a young man defined by his obsession with american youth culture. the work is a modern take on thomas gainsborough\'s the blue boy (1770), which sets a beautifully dressed aristocratic young man in the dramatic english countryside.
blake takes the appropriation of johns and noland a step further, by incorporating a real archery target into his work.  in this way, blake bluntly names the literal target "art" much in the way of his early role model duchamp, thus stripping away the art world\'s inherent pretension.'.
this painting depicts a meeting between three men: peter blake himself (middle), and british painters howard hodgkin and david hockney (left and right respectively). he painted from staged photographs of hodgkin, hockney and himself, and based the other figures on cuttings from magazines, returning to his earlier collaging instincts.
additionally, blotting paper can be used to carry lsd, a drug that doig took as a teen. to start, doig took a photo of his brother on ice onto which he had pumped water to create more interesting and vivid reflections.
this canvas features a green canoe floating on a yellow lake. this work was one of seven canoe paintings that would become one of doig\'s trademarks.
the low vantage point suggests we, the viewer, are in the lake, perhaps floating in one of doig\'s famed canoes. in my painting, a policeman looks out across the lake towards the viewer, the screamer.
in this mesmerizing canvas, pinpoint stars share a black and blue skyscape featuring a cloudy milky way. from the horizon a stretch of trees grows, glowing alien and coral-like, waving into the air as if in water.
the piece took six years to complete and doig worked on it up until the moment it was delivered to the gallery. at three and a half meters wide, this piece is so monumental that when it was installed in the south london gallery, windows had to be removed to get it in.
in this life-sized painting, francisco de sandoval y rojas, the first minister of spain, is shown as chief of the spanish armies riding a white steed. rubens\' composition, which reflects his study of titian\'s portrait of carlos v in muhlberg, created a model for equestrian portraits of the future, especially influencing van dyke.
working in collaboration with the famed animal and still-life painter frans snyders, who contributed the massive eagle, rubens rendered the brutal tale with corresponding violence. based on the greek play prometheus bound, this classical mythological painting presents the demigod prometheus who is being punished by zeus for giving the secret of fire to man.
rubens has one woman on the far right gaze out at us to make a human connection. their general direction is left to right along a curving lane where one man on horseback is pulling a rustic cart.
in 1609, one year after returning from italy, rubens married isabella brant. the couple here are in a double self-portrait under a honeysuckle bower.
in this rendition, we see the three magi, representing the lands and races that had heard about the birth of the savior, bearing gifts for the christ child. symbols add depth of meaning to the entire scene.
the triptych format, a central painting with two hinged side panels, or wings, had been used in northern europe since the middle ages. rubens was commissioned to paint his first major altarpiece in 1610 after returning to antwerp from italy.
in the last ten years of his life, rubens painted mythological works which were his "...hymns to the beauty of women...placed in magnificent landscapes..." as described by frans baudouin in his biography p. p. rubens. the three figures form a circle, linked by their arms, one with her back to the viewer.
the nude venus is seated gracefully, leaning into the center of the composition as she implores the muscular adonis to stay. the muscular adonis, the incarnation of a greek sculpture, is clothed in a vibrant red tunic, his body standing out against the light blue sky.
in city limits, guston\'s hooded characters squeeze into a car, like clowns, as if to go cause trouble in town.  his klansmen often undertook myriad tasks in his paintings, but more than most, this image reflects an aspect of guston\'s original motivation for switching back towards realism: a growing fear at the spread of political disorder and upheaval in america.'.
last piece is not guston\'s last abstract expressionist painting, but it represents a transition away from the shimmering forms of the early 1950s towards the recognizable motifs of his later, more figurative works.  if buddhism, and concepts of nothingness, had informed his earlier abstractions, this represents a move away from those inspirations.'.
the studio marks the beginning of philip guston\'s move away from abstraction and back to the figuration he practiced during the 1930s and 1940s, while he worked in the wpa mural painting style.  clement greenberg once remarked that, with the exception of arshile gorky, guston was the most romantic artist of his generation.'.
zone, a painting that reflects the focused concentration of guston\'s mature work, suggests a warm calm, with its mist of red hatch-marks filling the painting\'s center.  "look at any inspired painting," he once said, "it\'s like a gong sounding; it puts you in a state of reverberation."'.
at the center of the polyptych is the madonna della misericordia (madonna of mercy), to which the commissioning confraternity was dedicated. one can see the influences of masaccio, especially in the crucifixion scene, as well as brunelleschi, but this polyptych encapsulates the stark simplicity and geometrical exactitude for which piero della francesca is most known.
the death of adam forms part of a large fresco cycle, the legend of the true cross, painted by piero in the basilica of san francesco in arezzo. eventually, the tree of good and evil would sprout from him, perhaps represented by the large tree in the center of the fresco.
piero painted, among other paintings, the flagellation of christ for the duke and dedicated a treatise on perspective to him. the duke of urbino was one of piero\'s most important patrons.
to the left in the background, christ stands in a columned interior, being whipped before the roman pilate before his ultimate crucifixion. to the right in the foreground, three men in renaissance garb stand in conversation, either ignorant or unaware of the action behind them.
they decided to found a town at that spot, named borgo san sepolcro after the holy sepulchre (tomb of christ). it shows four soldiers sleeping in front of the tomb of christ, as he climbs up onto it after his resurrection.
champagne bubbles, expressed through an agitated line that alternates between thick and thin, create both a literal and symbolic feeling of froth. this lithograph launched bonnard\'s career from law into art; in 1889, he won a competition to design a poster advertising france champagne, which led him to create this illustration.
without the title, one might read this painting as being totally abstract, emphasizing as it does the flat surface of the painting rather than any depth of landscape.  bonnard took maurice denis\'s words further than any other member of this group: "a picture - before being a war horse, a female nude, or some anecdote - is essentially a flat surface covered with colors in a particular order."'.
this four-paneled work is characterized by its understatement, economy of line, and rhythm.  through the distortion of form for decorative effect, bonnard has created a world of decorative unreality that asserts the two-dimensionality of the wall, thus uniting art and architecture.'.
some of bonnard\'s bath scenes even recall passages in marcel proust\'s remembrance of things past (1913). locked in her environment, the figure (madame bonnard) - the un-idealized, "modern" nude - is at one with her surroundings.
the central figure, a secular madonna, the "virgin of science" refers to the laicization of the educational system. in 1886, puvis received a watershed commission from the sorbonne\'s architect henri paul nnot.
as in his other large-scale public commissions, puvis designed an allegorical scheme appropriate to the institution. in 1895, the boston public library hired him to help them decorate the grand staircase and second-floor gallery of the majestic new building designed by charles follen mckim.
during the paris commune in 1871, the town hall (htel de ville) was burned down and the third republic was established. this mural, commissioned for the new town hall, functions as a seasonal allegory and a political statement.
presented at the salon des artistes francais of 1883, the dream depicts a sleeping man - most likely a traveler, given the bag at his side.  puvis\'s effect on younger artists seeking an alternative to realism, on the one hand, and the academy, on the other, went far beyond his efforts as a muralist.'.
under a grey sky, a fisherman stands at the prow of his boat, arms folded, as if in prayer. when showing this work at the salon of 1881, puvis indicated that he wanted the painting to be regarded in "human, natural terms," with no religious, mystical, or philosophical symbolism.
universally considered among renoir\'s masterpieces, dance at the moulin de la galette is a snapshot of everyday life in the fashionable neighborhood of montmartre. the courtyard of the moulin de la galette, still in operation today, was a gathering place for working-class drinking, dining, and dancing.
this wonderfully composed piece is far from exemplary when considering renoir\'s later body of work. in this canvas, he rendered his mistress lise trhot as the roman goddess diana, a common trope in rococo portraiture.
the softly impressionistic gabrielle renard and infant son jean shows his nanny (also his wife\'s cousin) gabrielle playing with his son, the future film director jean renoir. beyond his grander masterpieces, renoir\'s oeuvre is also marked by a great number of very sweet images of families, often his own wife and three sons, in domestic settings.
the woman lowers her opera glasses, implying that she is no longer watching the events on stage and allowing her face to be seen. the theater played a prominent role in parisian life, from opera to the popular variety shows featuring can-can dancers, and depictions of the theater typically focused on the performers.
in luncheon of the boating party, renoir depicted a number of his close friends, including painters, art dealers, and his future wife aline charigot, in a smaller, more intimate setting than in a painting like dance at the moulin de la galette. looking beyond the individual subjects of luncheon, there exists an amount of composition typically foreign to impressionist canvases.
 in 1908, then, despite his failing health, portrait of ambroise vollard still shows renoir capable of considerable artistic achievement.' renoir celebrated their friendship by painting vollard many times in many different guises.
renoir painstakingly worked and reworked the large bathers for three years, including making several preparatory drawings and painted sketches before arriving at the finished product. beyond merely attempting to bring renaissance structure into impressionism, renoir also courted the timelessness of classical style by painting traditional subjects.
broadening the use of his basic pictorial vocabulary of lines, squares and primary colors, the black grid has been replaced by lines of color interspersed with blocks of solid color. this canvas presents the viewer with the culmination in mondrian\'s life-long pursuit of conveying the order that underlies the natural world through purely abstract forms on a flat picture plane.
composition with color planes shows his break with analytic cubism and exemplifies the principles he expressed in his essay "the new plastic in painting."  the composition is based on color and balance and gives even weight to all areas of the picture surface, moving toward the precise balance of his mature canvases.'.
in the 1920s, mondrian began to create the definitive abstract paintings for which he is best known. he limited his palette to white, black, gray, and the three primary colors, with the composition constructed from thick, black horizontal and vertical lines that delineated the outlines of the various rectangles of color or reserve.
pier and ocean marks a definitive step in mondrian\'s path toward pure abstraction.  mondrian had begun to translate what he saw as the underlying ordered patterns of nature into a pure abstract language.'.
the gray tree exemplifies mondrian\'s early transition toward abstraction, and his application of cubist principles to represent the landscape. the three-dimensional tree has been reduced to lines and planes using a limited palette of grays and black.
one of bruegel\'s best-known paintings, landscape with the fall of icarus incorporates a landscape in the foreground with an expansive seascape stretching away towards the horizon. this is one of two paintings by bruegel, which depict the story of icarus as told in ovid\'s metamorphoses.
five blind men trudge across the center of this canvas, canes in hand, arms stretched out hopelessly for guidance. this painting reflects bruegel\'s ability to create captivating allegorical works based on both religious doctrine and common maxims.
a mountainous forest landscape dominates bruegel\'s painting the conversion of paul. rose-marie and rainer hagen even suggest that the painting may be intended to invoke a similar conversion of alba as overcame paul, bringing an end to his murderous campaign.
in a snow-covered landscape, three hunters lead their dogs through a picturesque, sprawling village.  the exaggerated perspectival style of works like hunters in the snow, meanwhile, prefigures all subsequent landscape painting in which the conventional, post-renaissance three-dimensional perspective is eschewed.'.
the little bird at the center of the piece thus takes on a grim allegorical relevance via a common netherlandish expression: "to gossip like a magpie". a lush woodland landscape dominates this work from the penultimate year of bruegel\'s life.
in the netherlandish proverbs, a village setting is chosen as the location for a variety of eccentric and superstitious rituals. the actions undertaken by the villagers represent approximately 120 different netherlandish proverbs, all related to the oddities of human behavior.
a vast, partially constructed tower dominates bruegel\'s extraordinary 1563 work the tower of babel. this is one of three paintings bruegel created around the biblical tale of the tower of babel.
cecil court was a street in london lined with second-hand bookshops and a favorite thoroughfare for london\'s bohemian community. cecil court was the first important painting kitaj completed upon returning to london after elsi\'s suicide and marks something of a departure in style for kitaj.
the title erasmus variations (or desiderius erasmus) refers by name to the dutch scholar (erasmus) whose absent-minded sketches, or doodles, were (re)discovered by kitaj while visiting oxford. kitaj had recognized the sketches as a precursor of the automatic drawing technique that was to become a linchpin of surrealism and one can easily recognize this automatic technique in this painting.
kitaj\'s intuitive take on the waste land theme is in keeping with his preoccupation with jewish identity and history with the waste land narrative unfolding in the shadow of a nazi death camp (auschwitz) which sits in the top left hand of the frame. in addition to kitaj\'s almost kaleidoscopic visual treatments, the conceptual elements in his paintings can also provide specific \'intertextual\' threads through which one can enter the work.
los angeles no. 17 is one of a series of paintings kitaj presented in an exhibition at l.a. louver gallery in venice, california. indeed, kitaj said of the piece: "sandra and i became lovers again, after her death, in my old age in los angeles, the angels.
created while kitaj was still a student in england, \'the murder of rosa luxemburg\' is characteristic of the artist\'s lifelong concern with the theme of human experience and injustice, typically as it related to jewish history.  meanwhile, the collage\'s allusions to political history, revealed in written text telling of luxemburg\'s fate, is pasted to the top right of the frame.'.
the wedding features kitaj, fisher and his three children (though kitaj and fisher\'s son, max, was not born until after the wedding itself) who mingle with luminaries of the school of london - his extended family of artists - namely david hockney, lucian freud, frank auerbach, and leon kossoff. attributed to his late period, and painted six years after the event itself, the wedding is in effect a figurative mosaic of kitaj\'s marriage to the american artist sandra fisher.
whiteread exhibited this piece along with four other cast plaster works in her first solo exhibition after graduating from the slade. in both scale and ambition closet (1988) - the inside of a wardrobe cast in plaster and covered in black felt - is a remarkably powerful work.
her resulting work, embankment, consists of 14,000 translucent white polythene casts of cardboard boxes. in 2005, rachel whiteread was asked to produce a commission for the huge turbine hall at london\'s tate modern.
located in vienna\'s judenplatz, the work is a memorial to the victims of the holocaust, and consists of an inside-out library. whiteread\'s holocaust monument marks one of her earliest public sculptures, an aspect of her practice that has been increasingly important to her career.
untitled (house) was rachel whiteread\'s most ambitious sculptural work. furthermore, untitled (house) challenges ideas of the domestic and the concept of "home".
whiteread made this early small-scale, flesh-colored work by casting the inside of a hot water bottle in plaster. yet, whiteread\'s sculpture is far moved from classical sculpture.
she settled on a water tower, and originally installed the work on the roof of a building in soho between two functioning water towers. sometimes it stands out clearly and other times it blends in with its surroundings, much like the real water towers on which it is based.
american salad has a peculiar, patchwork appearance; portions of the collage-like painting overlap with one another, suggesting a relationship that seems illogical or even absurd. goings uses different approaches to visual representation to create the separate components: an airbrushed-looking, stylized face smiles radiantly in the lower right.
with works like this one, goings has left behind the reflective and usually impenetrable building exteriors and has gone inside. this modest breakfast stands in for the american morning routine itself.
the oft-repeated subject of american diners is rooted in goings\' personal travels and, aesthetically, in his fascination with light and the visual malleability of objects and surfaces by light. his works occasionally feature human figures as with the two waitresses in this piece.
painted in his characteristic late "stenographic" style, nice, the old casino displays dufy\'s use of loose outlines to demarcate forms, which he filled in with thin washes of color. but the beauty and cheerfulness of dufy\'s art do not disqualify him as a modernist.
dufy\'s painting, one of the largest ever made by any artist, was inspired by the story of the electric fairy from the ancient roman poet lucretius\'s on the nature of things. dufy included portraits of 110 famous scientists and thinkers who contributed to the invention and development of electricity, as well as elements of mythology and allegory.
in the harvester, dufy created a dynamic pattern based on the figure of a male harvester reaping wheat. in addition to his paintings, watercolors, and prints, dufy was famous for his original textile designs featuring whimsical repeating patterns and vivid colors.
raphael\'s portrait of his close friend baldassare castiglione is rife with intimacy and emotionality in its depiction of a cultured man. with its excellent vulnerability, raphael\'s portrait epitomized the restrained elegance of the courtier, which baldassare proposed as necessary in his book.
the fresco represents christianity\'s victory over philosophy, which is depicted in the school of athens, the fresco on the opposite wall. the disputation of the holy sacrament represents theology and shows the occupants of a catholic church underneath the span of heaven above their sacred altar.
in it, margherita is resting on raphael\'s knee, with raphael looking adoringly at his own painting of la fornarina.  more recently, cindy sherman modeled herself as la fornarina in her work untitled number 205 (1989).'.
  it is fitting to close with giorgio vasari who said of the sistine madonna, it is "a truly rare and extraordinary work."' it was in homage to his uncle pope sixtus iv (who was canonized and is now known as st.
although called the school of athens, the title refers to philosophers from the classical world rather than any particular school of philosophy. the school of athens received both critical and popular attention immediately upon completion and was instrumental in elevating raphael\'s public acclaim.
this was the last painting raphael worked on. it reflects the culmination of rachael\'s artistic achievement in his short life and began to receive public and critical acclaim following raphael\'s death.
the verse describes how, despite the love song sung by polyphemus, galatea spurns his love, sailing away with her company of sea-nymphs. the triumph of galatea was painted to decorate the villa farnesina for raphael\'s banker and friend agostino chigi.
although a portrait of extraordinary beauty, la donna velata is unique in that it is of a real person, not merely a represented objectification of beauty. of note is the pearl in her hair, a reference to her name, which means pearl.
rebecca horn produced this major site-specific installation in response to the victims of the buchenwald concentration camp, and specifically to confront the legacy of the holocaust more widely. for horn, victims were not only killed but also disappeared, and so the ash represented 6 million handfuls of ash, one for each victim of the holocaust.
einhorn (unicorn) is a white wearable sculpture intended to be worn by a female performer. indeed, unicorn extends the body and imbues the performer with an at once otherworldly and robotic quality.
the gigolo is a 45 minutes feature film set in the artist\'s new york studio. the curator, valentina ravaglia has described how in the gigolo horn\'s "mechanical sculptures serve as actors in the film whilst actors play their roles like dysfunctional machines.".
more recently the theme was revisited by sculptor george segal in depression bread line (1991). the bread line was a common theme in 1930s social realism as it demonstrated the tangible effects of the depression on the working classes.
here marsh captures a crowd on the beach at coney island. the two characters in the foreground frame the canvas and draw the eye into the crowd, the real focus of the piece.
marsh painted many scenes of people gathered at coney island, in this instance, side-show performers at the venue\'s carnival and amusement park. marsh first visited coney island as an illustrator for vanity fair where he found inspiration in the large crowds of new yorkers escaping from the city on hot days.
twenty cent movie depicts the lyric theatre, covered in advertising and with a crowd outside, members of the working classes who frequented cinemas for the escapism that movies offered. marsh was drawn to the cinema and often utilized cinematic imagery within his paintings, playing into the stereotypical themes and characters of 1930s films.
this photograph depicts a scene in the bowery part of new york city. men in coats and hats walk down the sidewalk while to the left a parked car is just visible.
bathsheba is shown holding a letter in her right hand while her servant dries her feet; king david had summoned her to appear before him. in order to conceal his adultery and marry bathsheba, king david sent eliam into battle and ordered his other generals to abandon him, leaving him to certain death.
jacob, apparently guided by god, could foresee that the younger son would be a greater person. although according to tradition, the eldest son should be blessed first with the elderly patriarch\'s hand, jacob deliberately puts his right hand on the head of the younger, fair-haired, and more angelic son.
during the 1630s rembrandt depicted many figures wearing middle eastern garments in his paintings, drawings, and etchings. rather, they are imaginative representations of a distant culture that feature dutch models, including rembrandt himself, dressed in exotic attire.
titian\'s unfinished self-portrait, which contains two circles, may have been an influence. rembrandt painted more than 40 self-portraits yet he did not routinely pose himself plainly dressed for painting as he did here.
tulp who is facilitating an anatomy lesson. the work depicts the important annual january anatomy lesson, which was an eagerly anticipated event for all the local senators, burgomasters, and aldermen of the city.
the group portrait, often called a "corporation portrait" was uniquely dutch and was oftentimes as enormous as a modern billboard. rembrandt painted this large canvas between 1640 and 1642 on commission for the musketeer branch of a civic militia, a wealthy segment of amsterdam society.
this painting, rembrandt\'s only seascape, depicts the dramatic miracle when jesus intervened to calm a violent storm on the sea of galilee. the biblical story from the new testament would be familiar to the dutch people of rembrandt\'s time period.
in varo\'s allegory, winter appears threatening and frozen, holding captive the promise of new growth amid a parched high desert landscape. painted while the artist was exploring the venezuelan jungle with a french scientific expedition, allegory of winter incorporates varo\'s work as a naturalist with her surrealism-inspired use of the symbolic, often contradictory language of dreams.
 varo therefore, whilst seemingly extraordinarily, in fact quite realistically portrays an ordinary woman continuing the cycle of natural creation.' yet there is also a sense of longing in this image, which raises the question of whether varo did want to have children.
 in a submerged landscape - a good metaphor for the subconscious - varo is an explorer on an unending quest for enlightenment and spiritual development.' the woman steers the boat by pulling on strings and directs the vessel to a hollowed out room inside one of the trees.
in this relatively late work for varo, a wheeled human-animal has been constructed out of various animal bones. as varo\'s only known three-dimensional piece, the work was made in connection with de homo rodans, a \'scientific\' document that she wrote under the pen name of halikcio von fuhrngschmidt.
 the nocturnal insects fly towards the single light source, delicate but bringing hopeful lightness and the message of transformation.' in a bare room, two large crystalline-winged moths flutter between a dark interior window and a burning candle.
in luminous colors of earth, a figure wrapped in a mantle made from entwined forest foliage, draws a musician\'s bow across a light ray that intersects the painting. no longer restricted by a necessity to make money, in parallel to the birds, varo now enjoys newfound regeneration.
as is typical for varo, a single female figure is in our focus, but the setting has moved inward and has become claustrophobic. varo evokes the egyptian isis, the goddess of the moon and of magic.
with assured mythical and universalist beliefs, the microcosm of an individual becomes the macrocosm of the earth, and varo feels intuitively connected to the energy of the candlelight and the mountain. having painted over the fumage to create clouds swirling around and linking the stony peaks, she reveals the inherent connectivity of all.
 the work is called in the american west, not the american west."' young fortin calls to mind heroic images from classical mythology of hercules battling the hydra or apollo and the python.
in this double portrait of his friend, the painter francis bacon, avedon placed a pair of negatives shot during the same session side-by-side. avedon is probably referring directly to a diptych made the same year by bacon, which featured two studies of himself for a self-portrait he was working on.
avedon\'s portrait reveals a rarely seen contemplative side of the hollywood legend, marilyn monroe. avedon described the session, explaining that she had come to the studio and "for hours she danced and sang and flirted and did this thing that\'s - she did marilyn monroe.
in addition to introducing movement into previously static fashion photography, avedon also introduced spontaneity, which can at times produce exceedingly awkward results. in this photograph, german fashion model, veruschka (vera grafin von lehndorff-steinort or veruschka von lehndorff) stands en pointe like a ballerina while the fluid motion of her dress billowing immodestly high creates an organic, bulbous shape over her otherwise slender body.
berkeley no. 8 is one of diebenkorn\'s last abstract expressionist paintings, executed upon his return to california and just before transitioning to more imagistic work as part of the bay area figurative movement. perhaps hinting at this return to representational form, berkeley no. 8 - as opposed to his earlier abstract expressionist works - exhibits a more expanded view of the landscape, with an increased number of forms and more varied detail.
diebenkorn painted this suburban california street in 1963, when he moved away from making abstract work and returned to a more representational style, having become a leading figure of the bay area figurative movement.  although at one level the painting is clearly a cityscape or landscape, at another level the viewer can cordon off almost any rectangular part of the picture to enjoy an almost totally abstract painting in miniature.'.
they contrast with the homey, but stately and enduring, presence of the warmly lit hotel. these railroad tracks also connect to the outside world, leading, as they do, out of town.
this work typifies diebenkorn\'s abstract expressionist period in albuquerque, the influence of new mexico\'s desert landscape clearly evident in the sunburnt red and gold colors that the artist summons forth. this painting also exhibits the gestural markings and quasi-symbols that had defined the abstract expressionists\' interest in a subconscious reality, seen most clearly in the work of jackson pollock and clyfford still.
diebenkorn\'s shift from abstract landscape to a more figurative style that had begun in 1954 can be seen in this painting.  from their examples, he learned to paint the sole figure - newly imbued with a level of human psychology - embedded within the abstract surface design.'.
estes\'s first trip to the antarctic in 2007 inspired a series of twelve paintings of the world\'s most sparsely inhabited continent. like many visitors to antarctica, he saw the continent from a cruise ship.
double self-portrait is an unconventional self-portrait. his reflection appears alongside the slender white frame at the center of the large windows at the front.
the only reason i change things is simply to make what is really happening clearer. estes\' signature splitting of a single image is apparent in this painting in which the interior of the ubiquitous murano glass shop provides a shallow, largely flat contrast to the layers of reflection in the large glass storefront.
pei and the capitol building are on opposite sides of the expansive atrium, which claims a considerable portion of the painting and dwarfs pei. in this portrait, i.m. pei is seen in the far left middle ground, resting his arm on a railing, creating a line that draws one\'s eye directly to his figure.
though estes moved to an apartment and studio space near central park west in 1971, he began incorporating new york\'s iconic green space into his painting only in 1987. estes knew the painting well, having developed an affinity for it during his years at the art institute of chicago.
the plaza, as with many of estes\' works, reads, like a conventional two-part painting or diptych. it represents two radically different environments: the enclosed, protected space of a city bus and the open, busy vehicle and pedestrian space near the famous plaza hotel at the southern end of central park.
water taxi, mount desert takes inspiration from the people and landscapes of mount desert island, maine, where estes has owned a home since the early 1970s. it depicts fellow painter, nancy mccormick, and her daughter, nina, riding in the back of a water taxi as it carries them to northeast harbor.
fun house, a collaborative work, was one of the greatest critical successes of the 1956 whitechapel exhibition, "this is tomorrow." like hamilton\'s just what is it that makes today\'s homes..., also included in the exhibition, fun house is an absurd, hedonistic hodgepodge of pop culture sources.
hamilton was immediately taken with the careful composition of the image and the atmosphere of foreboding it created, and created this screenprint. while teaching in newcastle, hamilton found on the floor of his classroom a film still from shockproof, a 1949 movie directed by douglas sirk, a german director well-known for his hollywood melodramas.
this screenprint is composed of a series of images of marilyn monroe that hamilton discovered soon after her death in 1962. the work also reveals a more personal side to hamilton, and contrasts sharply with the absurdist irony of his earlier images.
  in its use of press photography and its choice of celebrities and criminals, swingeing london 67 (f) anticipates the work of gerhard richter and other conceptual artists who returned to painting in the 1980s and 90s.' this painting by hamilton is based on a photograph he found in a newspaper.
the number 60 runs throughout the piece, which features 60 lines of texts and was then reproduced into 60 prints. this lithograph and screen print, which measuring 189.50 cm high, stands roughly the size of a man and catalogues a series of experiences noted during a sixty-minute walk.
this piece is a straight line in the grass, a path-like impression made through the act of simply walking. where pop had focused on the consumable object, long\'s work deemphasized the art object in favor of a performance or an idea.
installed on the gallery floor, this sculpture is comprised of a ring of red rocks, arranged precisely to create a four-meter wide circle. we can also read this distinctness as a sign of respect to the material in its most natural state.
this piece balances order and disorder, containing chaotic and expressive mud painting within in a perfect circle. through simple, bare gestures, long creates an intricate pattern; working with the humblest materials, he creates an object of nearly hypnotic beauty.
long acted as a conduit, replicating the natural manner in which water creates lines upon the landscape. long created two broad, snaking lines extending from a riverbank in the warli tribal land of maharashtra, india, reaching into the landscape towards fields and trees.
this work, an abstracted study of an animal head, shows pousette-dart\'s interest in tribal and jungian themes of confrontation and sacrifice.  the oval shape is repeated and modified to suggest eye, horn, egg, yolk, and fetus, all surrounded by his characteristic black contour line.'.
pousette-dart created a number of works in the early 1950s like this one, using pencil and white paint on canvas or board. originally prompted by a tight budget, the approach shows pousette-dart exploring an ethereal side to the abstract grids of picasso and his new york school heirs.
with its allover style of colored dots, golden presence exemplifies pousette-dart\'s pointillist approach.  pousette-dart here evokes the spiritual element not through suggestive subject matter but through color, texture, and the veil-like, shimmering surface of the work.'.
in now a turning orb, pousette-dart employs familiar forms from his career, like nested circles, pointillist dots, and curved arcs and lines.  here, as in many of his late works, pousette-dart balances a sense of structure and harmony (in the even weave of the gridded forms and the central circle) with dynamism and energy (in the vibrating brushstrokes and the sense of whirring motion).'.
symphony no. 1, the transcendental is a large painting, considered by many to be the first mural-scale work of abstract expressionism.  while the spiritual theme and many of the shapes are familiar from his 1930s work, pousette-dart\'s style has become more painterly and textured.'.
they are even presented as labeled objects: man crazy nurse, surfer nurse, nympho nurse, etc. prince\'s interest in cliches and stereotypes inspired his nurse series, which he began in 2003.
even the lofty title, spiritual america, does not transform the photograph into high art, but helps to position prince\'s work as a critique of american culture, exploitation and ambition. the original photograph had been taken with the consent of shields\'s mother, who sold gross the unlimited publication rights for $450.
an exhibition catalogue of de kooning\'s women series inspired prince to create this series of mixed media works. joining a long tradition of artists copying earlier masters in an attempt to learn their ways, prince engages with de kooning\'s most iconic series.
many of the images selected by prince from instagram are sexy or appealing, an erotic charge often amplified by his commentary. before capturing the image, prince commented on it, creating the appearance of a relationship between himself and the original author, and giving himself the final word in their exchange.
in prince\'s joke series, however, there is no profound realization to be had.  prince describes his joke series as abstract paintings, especially in countries where english is not the dominant language, further confusing the standards of high and low culture, art and non-art material.'.
created specifically for the guggenheim bilbao, snake is another example of how the natural and built environment factors into the conception and subsequent experience of serra\'s sculpture.  thus they draw a viewer\'s attention to the potential instability and danger implied in all structures of astounding tonnage.'.
modernism was at a right angle; the whole 20th century was a right angle."  it is hardly a wonder, therefore, that tilted arc aroused such antipathy in an era unaccustomed to such bold displays of artistic, site-specific intervention.'.
recalling his experience of italy, serra regards his torqued ellipse series as a logical conclusion to the architectural problems, or, as it were, visual irresolution, suggested by san carlo alle quattro fontane [church of saint charles at the four fountains], a roman catholic church dating from the baroque era, by francesco borromini (1599-1667).  although the church\'s dynamic, undulating facade is recapitulated in the bending walls of snake, the latter\'s embracing contours evokes the artist\'s achievement of security and serenity, after he had long pondered his predecessor\'s expression, in travertine limestone, of restless spiritual ambition.'.
although usually regarded as an artist\'s statement (akin to a private, reflective diary entry), verb list might also be regarded as the artist\'s chronological, aesthetic agenda, setting out his subsequent development in sculpture. like a map, or a theoretical diagram, verb list finally "stands in," as a visual and conceptual proxy for something more physically tangible, or virtually touchable: sculpture itself.
in this case, the artist\'s decision to present ink in paper instead of ink on paper reflects a similar desire to push at the constrains of different compositional processes, as does his unusual combination of copper and paper, which gives ink in fiber its unique textural associations. the hard and soft of the copper and paper seem resolved through the mediating presence of the ink: as if the liquid were adhering the two materials to one other.
new mexico, new york # 14 is one of a number of wall-bound low-relief works created with fir plywood. it consists of a simple, abstract, red-and-white painting on an irregularly shaped board which droops in the center.
attempting to move beyond traditional painting methods through his early work, tuttle began to consider the possibilities of the bare canvas. purple octagon is an important early work, indicative of tuttle\'s homely approach to conceptual art.
one of tuttle\'s most controversial works, ten kinds of memory and memory itself consists of a series of string \'drawings\' laid out on the gallery floor. in one sense, tuttle\'s string drawings give three-dimensional life to the lines of the abstract sketch.
endless rhythm was named by sonia delaunay as a way to describe the cyclical looping effect of the circular forms that seem to mimic the flow of electric currents. delaunay carefully selected his colors to present subtle gradients and then contrasts these with the thick black and pale blue background.
 the murals were hung in the entrance to the muse d\'art moderne in 1977 in honor of delaunay\'s earlier contributions to abstract art.' in response,delaunay chose to recreate the results of his earlier experimentation with simultaneity and chromatic color - this time on an unprecedented scale.
the second depicts the classical paris that is represented by a reference to the judgment of paris.  this painting shows delaunay\'s innovative grasp on time and space - themes he would explore further as he moved towards abstraction.'.
delaunay painted his first eiffel tower in 1909 to celebrate his engagement to sonia terk. the rich red color is heightened in contrast to the pale blue background, which again emphasises the tower\'s dominance on the parisian skyline.
propelled on by the success of the exposition commission, a year later delaunay produced another major commission, this time for the salon de tuileries.  this was to be delaunay\'s last major piece before the couple fled paris for the south of france, where robert died a premature death just three years later.'.
saint severin was the first major series of paintings created by delaunay in 1909. the result is a modern rendering of a medieval church through a series of repeated arches framed by the cropped composition.
the simultaneous windows series are delaunay\'s last semi figurative works before he began experimenting with complete non-objectivity. in 1911, sonia had created a patchwork blanket for their son that famously inspired these works.
the self-titled image shows the horizon of the open ocean behind a suspended frame on which the words \'for the glory of wind and water\' have been hand-written on a transparent surface. indeed, critic nicholas dawidoff, citing w.s. di piero, argued that frank\'s \'genius for expressing emotional complication came from an artistic innocence\' while di piero could only marvel at frank\'s \'ability to look at the world as a child does - without the intrusions of experience"\'.
for his first movie, pull my daisy, frank was to collaborate with other associates of the beat circle. in this respect, pull my daisy preempted the american underground movement that gained notoriety within the new york artist community in the early 1960s.
new york city captures a group of striking white workers on a new york sidewalk. the \'flagbearer\'s\' demeanour - arms folded across his chest, his gaze turned towards an object or events outside the frame, and away from the protesters - suggests an indifference towards the plight of the white workers.
through santa fe, new mexico, another of his \'road\' photographs, frank contradicted the picture of an urbane america he had helped to promote through his commercial work. santa fe, new mexico shows us an abandoned gas station set against a desert wilderness, the gas pump \'figures\' allowing one to recall perhaps the theme of human desolation as explored by the likes of edward hopper in his famous 1940s painting gas.
frank had been inspired by the work of walker evans, and especially his photographs of battered american highways. in his effort to promote a new understanding of photography as art, he presented unbalanced compositions through high contrasts of black and white - "black and white is the vision of hope and despair.
this photograph shows frank\'s wife mary and his son, pablo, in their car, captured through the windshield.  nevertheless, u.s. 90, en route to del rio, texas, the final image in the americans, provided a most fitting image by which to bring his famous road trip to its conclusion.'.
published in 1952 while frank was in zurich, the book (initially only three copies were produced) featured photographs taken by frank on his early travels abroad. the image was featured in black and white things, a handcrafted book designed by frank\'s friend, werner zryd.
to create cat litter, gober once again undermined the traditional expectations of the found object. as with many of gober\'s works, cat litter is concerned with perceptions of cleanliness.
 however, it soon became clear that the imagery gober explored in slides of a changing painting would inform his artistic practice for the rest of his life.' the changing slides create a narrative through the contrast of similar and yet dissimilar images.
beyond these references to monuments of earlier, avant-garde art, gober\'s sinks also engage with the realities of their own time. this untitled piece is one of a series of sinks that gober began to make in the 1980s.
this untitled work consists of a hand-cast beeswax candle, the base of which is covered with human hair. when considered as a phallic symbol, the candle stands in for male desire and virility.
drawing once again on his interest in drains and plumbing, gober places storm drains throughout the installation, covered by such items as the madonna statue and two silk-lined suitcases. gober did indeed create an indoor grotto, as several components of the installation were situated on top of storm drains that covered water-filled tide pools below.
in this work, "hole" is the name of a town, a destination for a father and son bicycle ride in samuel beckett\'s molloy. the work is one of a series of wooden sculptures indiana made shortly after his move to coenties slip in lower manhattan.
in a 2011 interview, indiana explained that he wanted to "cover the earth with hope and bring hope to every country in the world."  the universal appeal and popularity of the many iterations of indiana\'s "hope" demonstrate his ability to harness fine art and popular culture to create icons of unity and inspiration.'.
although love predates the love generation and flower children, indiana captured the spirit of the 1960s in a word. indiana began exploring this "love" theme in the 1960s, working first on canvas and then in sculptural form.
the first in a series of "american dream" paintings, indiana uses words that simultaneously reference both american life and his own biography. the american dream i (1961) features four circles depicted in two rows of two.
robert indiana\'s the demuth american dream #5 (1963) consists of five square panels displayed in a cross shape. both indiana and demuth played with ideas of american identity, creating works that seemed to simultaneously celebrate and question the "american dream" of the modern age.
as reflected in the title, the green diamond eat/the red diamond die is a 1962 work consisting of two painted diamond-shaped panels intended to be hung side-by-side. in the first, a red circle containing the word "eat" in green lettering is placed on a green background.
 here, mapplethorpe photographed warhol in a more or less positive perspective, while on another occasion, warhol photographed mapplethorpe in deep red, owing perhaps to his relentless distrust of mapplethorpe.' mapplethorpe admired warhol as a teenager and after he moved to new york mapplethorpe soon competed with warhol to take celebrity portraits.
the subtle gradation of light in this photograph exhibits the well-defined lines and the natural shape of the lily. calla lily, depicts two of mapplethorpe\'s most famous motifs: timeless black and white photography and floral still lifes.
this portrait portrays two of mapplethorpe\'s friends - a black man, ken moody, and a white man, robert sherman. sherman reaches his head over moody\'s shoulder, as both men face directly to the left side of the frame.
leatherman #1 shows mapplethorpe exploring his artistic and sexual individuality through a play on cultural norms and visual cues. the juxtaposition of the sexualized gay man in leather against the pastel-colored, floral motif emit synchronized feelings of pain and pleasure.
lisa lyon met mapplethorpe in 1980 and they collaborated on many photography projects including a film as well as a book titled, lady, lisa lyon (1983). lisa lyon is a testament of mapplethorpe\'s commitment to formalism, in both male and female form, punctuated at the latter part of his career.
mark stevens (mr. 10 ) portrays a well-endowed male figure, the gay porn star mark stevens, outfitted in black leather chaps. mark stevens (mr. 10 ) purely represents the style and imagery mapplethorpe became (in)famous for at the height of his career: homoerotic and sexually charged black and white photography.
this portrait from 1975 shows the artist coming into his own and becoming self-aware as studio photographer, artist, subject, and sexual object. self-portrait is a black and white photograph of a young mapplethorpe posed shirtless against a white background.
mapplethorpe understood that clothing is used to mark sexual identity and independence, and he used art to provide a context for erotic display. the artist created a sculpture consisting of two simple items: a wood frame conventionally used to stretch canvas, and a personal pair of simple blue briefs.
while morris\'s image barely raised an eyebrow, "the benglis ad" was met with an angry uproar that dramatically illustrated the sexual double standard. in the ad, featured in artforum magazine, morris is seen from the waist up, flexing his muscles and outfitted only in s &amp; m gear: a german army helmet, aviator sunglasses, steel chains, and a spiked collar.
as its title indicates, morris\'s box with the sound of its own making consists of an unadorned wooden cube, accompanied by a recording of the sounds produced during its construction. cage was reportedly transfixed by box with the sound of its own making, as morris later recalled: "when cage came, i turned it on... and he wouldn\'t listen to me.
the ephemerality and unpredictability explored in morris\'s felt pieces was addressed in other aspects of his oeuvre as well, such as his steam works. one of these pieces was steam work for bellingham-ii, commissioned by the university of washington in 1971 and set in the rolling hills of the university\'s campus.
 it also underpinned his instructions that the work be arranged differently each time it was to be exhibited so that viewers would experience the work differently as well.' one of morris\'s best-known minimalist pieces, untitled (l-beams) lacks any texture, trace of the artist\'s hand or figural content that would otherwise distract the viewer from pure engagement with the arranged forms.
this form was not permanent, as whenever untitled (pink felt) was reinstalled in a new location the felt pieces were dropped anew, resulting in a different composition for every iteration. in addition to introducing ephemerality into the artistic process, works such as untitled (pink felt) represented a striking departure from pieces like untitled (l-beams), with their serially repeated geometric shapes of works.
at five in the afternoon began as a small pen and ink drawing that motherwell composed in 1948 to accompany a poem by harold rosenberg. a year later, motherwell reinvented the drawing as a small painting and renamed the work after a line in the poem "lament for ignacio sanchez mejias," by federico garcia lorca.
pancho villa, dead and alive is a direct reference to a photograph that motherwell encountered of the murdered revolutionary, pancho villa.  in its allusion to the mexican revolution, this work also prefigures the themes that would drive motherwell\'s seminal elegy to the spanish republic series.'.
"i like everything about mir," motherwell wrote in a 1959 essay for art news.  mir represented, in motherwell\'s mind, the quintessential fearless artist who said and painted whatever he pleased.'.
another collaboration between rauschenberg and john cage, this print redefined the medium for the 20th century in a fatalistically neo-dada fashion. while it was his idea and direction that initiated the creation of the print, cage acted as the printer and press.
one of rauschenberg\'s first "combines," bed transcends the line between painting and sculpture through its dadaist assemblage of traditional materials and the detritus of everyday life. rauschenberg coined the term combine to describe a series of works from the 1950s and 1960s that literally combine the media of painting and sculpture within a single, three-dimensional art object.
among rauschenberg\'s most iconic and controversial combines, canyon features amongst its mixed media; pieces of wood, a pillow, a mirror, and a stuffed bald eagle.  critics cite references ranging from nationalism in the guise of mccarthyism to the greek ganymede myth embedded within the taxidermied bird, yet rauschenberg always left the interpretation open to the viewer.'.
through the erasure of de kooning\'s drawing, rauschenberg acknowledged his admiration for his predecessor, but also signaled a movement away from abstract expressionism. he intentionally made rauschenberg\'s act of erasure difficult by deliberately choosing a heavily marked drawing filled with charcoal and pencil.
immediately after the turmoil of the 1960s had come to a close, rauschenberg created this collage summarizing the upheaval of the decade. other images surrounding the astronaut portray urban violence, the vietnam war, and a peace vigil - all descriptions of the tumult of the 1960s.
while the space race was still in its infancy when rauschenberg included astronauts in his 1964 silkscreen paintings, by 1969, space flight was a reality that inspired rauschenberg, and many americans, with the potential for collaboration between man and technology.  sky garden is one of the largest lithographs in the series, at an astonishing 89 inches in height and was the largest hand-pulled lithograph ever created when it was printed in 1969.'.
rauschenberg created a series of silkscreen paintings that allowed for an open-ended association of meanings through his appropriation and arrangement of mass media imagery. while rauschenberg was no stranger to collaged found imagery, the silkscreen technique reinvigorated his artistic practice in the early 1960s.
originally viewed as a scandalous swindle, rauschenberg\'s white paintings were an early codification of the artistic ideals that dominated his entire oeuvre. the white paintings currently exist in five different permutations of multi-paneled canvases, which rauschenberg intentionally left free of any mark of the artist\'s hand.
the painted fabric is stapled to the gallery wall and bordered by lines drawn on the wall in blue chalk. the unstretched fabric and chalk lines give the piece an air of being incomplete, as one traditionally assumes that the chalk lines would be erased and the painted fabric itself placed within a frame.
unlike paintings such as arista, which is stapled directly to the gallery wall, counsel sits slightly away from the wall, raised from the surface by steel brackets. but the positioning away from the wall also points to the "constructed" as opposed to painted nature of the work.
also like the abstract expressionists, ryman inserts his bright yellow signature at the bottom, signaling the work\'s completion. ryman\'s use of color here also serves a second important function, which is to reveal the substantive nature of the materials.
much in the same way that one can "tune out" background music by refusing to strain one\'s ears to capture the sound or, alternatively, focus on the background music completely. here, the thickly laid white paint acts as a type of screen for the red, purple, and yellow hues behind it.
while tragically, smithson played no role in the actual construction of amarillo ramp, the posthumous piece is a fitting tribute to his life\'s work and artistic philosophy. amarillo ramp is comprised of a 140-foot diameter partial circle of rock, which ascends from level ground up to a height of 15 feet.
smithson created asphalt rundown - the first monumental earthwork that he made outside, to be seen outside - in a quarry on the outskirts of rome. smithson said his intention was to "root it in the contour of the land, so that it\'s permanently there and subject to the [sic] weathering.".
blind in the valley of the suicides depicts a human transforming into a tree and may have been inspired by dante\'s divine comedy. smithson would continue to explore the theme of vision throughout his later work - particularly in pieces involving mirrors - but he soon abandoned figurative drawing.
smithson began making the mirror displacement series shortly after his site/non-site works.  as in the site series, smithson was preoccupied with the way material, or another site, might be represented; might the materials in the displacement be thought to "mirror" their presence elsewhere?'.
the northern section of the great salt lake, where smithson chose to site spiral jetty, was cut off from fresh water supplies when a nearby causeway was constructed by the southern pacific railroad in 1959. and, by inserting the jetty into this damaged section, and using entirely natural materials native to the area, smithson called attention to environmental blight.
as one of matta\'s "social morphology" paintings, being with (etre avec) represents a direct response to the horrors of the second world war. matta\'s deep-seated dismay finds expression in the menacing mechanical contraptions and the contorted, violently violated humanoid forms that populate the painting.
exemplery of matta\'s work from the mid1950s, etre cible nous monde shows a cosmic landscape dominated by a fantastical machine highly reminiscent of duchamp\'s the large glass .. (1915-1923).  these fears were intensified by russia\'s launch of the sputnik satellite in 1957.'.
matta produced the earth is a man after being greatly affected by the dramatic landscape during a trip through mexico in 1941.  interestingly, the earth is a man shares its name with an epic poem matta composed in 1936 to commemorate frederico garcia lorca\'s violent death.'.
matta was dedicated to the notion of fostering an artistic and social renaissance in latin america, particularly in his native chile. he painted the massive, cartoon-like wall mural, the first goal of the chilean people, in honor of the 1970 political victory of socialist president salvador allende.
painted primarily in a palette of muted brown, grey, and cream, brooks\' painting features a slight nude young woman reclining on a large sofa. the crucial difference is that this woman is seen and painted by another woman, not by a man.
caught is a work on paper by brooks that is part of a larger series. or, with no shortage of traumatic episodes, the demons could stand for maya\'s husband, the man who forcefully raped and impregnated brooks.
a large and powerful female figure dominates brooks\' la france croise. the funds raised from the thoughtful pamphlet sales went directly towards helping the red cross and other war efforts.
of interesting note however, when brooks exhibited this painting she referred to it not by its title but as "the dead woman." the model is brooks\' lover at the time, ida rubenstein, a beautiful dancer.
indeed, similar to a j.m.w.turner landscape, brooks presents the viewer with muted tones but then grabs the eye\'s attention with highlights in red. here the artist stands tall, assured, and beautiful, dressed in a black equestrian suit with dark grey gloves and complete with top hat.
here, factory workers gather (the factory is in the upper-right background) however, there is no evidence of their labor, nor are they seen in work clothes. these anomalies suggest that perhaps these men have either left work, or are seeking work during lean times.
the brick wall behind the blues musicians serves to move them into our picture plane, so that we can more closely observe their faces and other details. three musicians, one with a guitar in hand, dominate this scene painted in rich browns and blues; bearden\'s lavish use of the color blue, in fact, suggests the blues, the singular african-american folk music.
to either side of christ, bearden places figures of onlookers, which he painted in washes of bright blues and purples. soon after his honorable discharge from the u.s. army, bearden began a series entitled the passion of christ (1945), inspired by the gospels of matthew and mark.
in his collages of the late 1960s and 1970s, bearden\'s colors became richer and his patterns more vibrant and decorative, introducing patterns from patchwork cloth and actual pieces of cloth into his works. the use of patterned cloth and recycling cloth has deep roots in african and southern black history and art.
during the 1930s, bearden was active in the artists\' organization 306 group and the harlem artists guild. in this horizontally expansive work, bearden pays tribute to harlem, which was where he lived as a young teen as well as where he established his first studio in 1940 on 125th street, the heart of harlem.
and, when writing his own piano lesson (1990), for which he won his second pulitzer prize, he likewise set the play in pittsburgh, bearden\'s childhood and teenage hometown.  wilson also found inspiration for other plays within the collages of bearden, especially in the four-part pittsburgh cycle.'.
across the frontal plane, bearden has cut and pasted photographs of women and of african sculpture, which he reworks into black visages. as bearden remarked, trains "could take you away and also bring you to where you were.".
this collage stands in contrast to his earlier folk musicians (1941-42), which is more aligned with the mood of social realism. in later works such as this, bearden begins to integrate snippets of his own earlier work into his collages.
this small painting, less than eighteen by sixteen inches, depicts colonel cody or \'buffalo bill\' on his favorite white horse. she met colonel cody and his wide array of performers from all over the world who had thrilled the parisians.
bonheur exhibited sheep by the sea at the salon of 1867 although empress eugenie of france had commissioned the painting herself. this family grouping of sheep on the rocks is a subject to which bonheur returns repeatly throughout her career.
the paler distant mountains serve as a backdrop for the artist\'s "...reverence for the dignity of labor and her visions of human beings in harmony with nature." although the painting is dominated by a dense pack of animals, the dynamic composition incorporates one of bonheur\'s most spectacular landscapes.
he is responsible for his own decadence, while the horse is only a slave." bonheur writes, "the horse is, like man, the most beautiful and most miserable of creatures, only, in the case of man, it is vice or property that makes him ugly.
the artist shows us a version of fence-line weaning in which the calves see and hear their mother but are forced to find food and water for themselves. this relatively small painting, less than six feet sqaure, depicts a real life situation in the rustic mountain home of a mother and her calves.
set against a bright orange background, kiss me, stupid consists of a black and white image of a couple kissing in the right foreground of the painted canvas. a common theme in drexler\'s art are collaged images of couples embracing, referencing movies and other media.
marilyn pursued by death features the hollywood actress marilyn monroe in a black skirt, white shirt and black sunglasses hurriedly rushing as if in an attempt to move off the right side of the canvas on which she is painted. behind her a man in black pants, white shirt, and black sunglasses pursues her.
a brightly colored painting, night visitors features a dead man in a black suit slumped on a bright green floral design sofa in the right foreground. although referencing this image, the narrative is full of a sense of ambiguity and mystery which drexler wants the viewer to contemplate.
 lichtenstein has said, "the real brushstrokes are just as pre-determined as the cartoon brushstrokes."' lichtenstein was a prolific printmaker throughout his career, and his prints played a substantial role in establishing printmaking as a significant art form in the 1960s.
public and outdoor artworks, both painting and sculpture, constitute a significant portion of lichtenstein\'s work, starting with a mural painted for the 1964 world\'s fair in queens, new york. the large-scale sculpture house i plays with perspective and illusion: depending on where the viewer stands, he or she will see the building\'s corner appear to move forward or backward within space.
lichtenstein was particularly fascinated by the abstract way in which cartoonists drew mirrors, using diagonal lines to denote a reflective surface. he once remarked, "now, you see those lines and you know it means \'mirror,\' even though there are obviously no such lines in reality.
popeye was one of the very first pop paintings that lichtenstein created in the summer of 1961.  whereas most believed this should be achieved with abstract art, lichtenstein here demonstrated that one could achieve it just as well by borrowing from low culture.'.
the medici were friends of the del lama family, and important patrons for botticelli himself. it is possible that del lama chose this subject to decorate his chapel because one of the magi, traditionally known as "caspar", or "gaspare", is his namesake.
this unusual late scene by botticelli has an almost surrealistic quality to it, with its ornate setting, blank skies and allegorical figures. as the art historian guido cornini argues, "botticelli transforms the literary notion into a bizarre elaboration, revitalizing and at the same time exhausting the classical allegory.
dante, the most famous of italian poets, wrote his divine comedy between c. 1308 and 1320 while living in florence. in the 1480s, botticelli began working on a series of drawings to illustrate the poem, 92 of which survive, including the map of hell.
although botticelli lost favor after his death, his reputation was revived in the late 19th century and since then the birth of venus has risen to international fame. like the slightly earlier primavera, the birth of venus is groundbreaking for presenting a non-religious scene from classical mythology on such a large scale.
as art historian patricia rubin points out, "botticelli\'s venus, posed with her exhausted lover mars, is, by definition, the pagan adulteress. in this panel painting, botticelli turns once again to a mythological subject.
however, while lichtenstein\'s works use dots to delineate and simplify a composition, polke\'s dots -- sometimes humorously termed "polke dots" -- function to distort and obscure his subjects. polke\'s bunnies is composed using a dot technique that characterizes several of his paintings completed in the mid-1960s.
 it mocks the sometimes sickeningly sweet imagery of socialist realism and blurs the line between the consumer and the ideology of consumption.' chocolate painting is a confluence of seemingly opposing ideologies: this chocolate bar, sans label, becomes a sort of signifier for banality, uniformity, and uncritical consumption.
one of the best known such works is his potato house, a flat-pack, lattice structure studded with real potatoes. in this work, the potato structure can be seen either as sheltering or caging the viewer, who is invited to step inside.
this work consists of two canvases, one labeled sender (sender) and one empfnger (receiver). some of the squares are labeled ja (yes) and nein (no).
to create this work, polke painted a series of german swear words and abusive terms onto several stitched-together sheets of flannel.  works such as the large cloth of abuse demonstrate polke\'s tendency to resist what he regarded as the inherent "restriction" he observed in the art world.'.
without seeing the event taking place, or knowing what is held within the cube, buried cube relies on the idea, as opposed to a finished object. a conceptual piece, this work was produced shortly following the publication of lewitt\'s 1968 manifesto describing the new conceptual art movement.
this accumulation of open structures signifies a revival of seriality in lewitt\'s work, inspired by the serial photographs of eadweard muybridge, whose work lewitt discovered in an abandoned book a previous tenant had left in his apartment. looking at serial project #1 as a whole, it appears to be nothing so much as a city, revealing lewitt\'s architectural roots.
as one of the first open structures, standing open structure black can be seen as the standard building block for much of lewitt\'s later work. derived from the spare, iconic forms that began with such paintings as wall structure blue, this work stands as their most elemental component.
similar to lewitt\'s first wall drawings shown at paula cooper gallery in 1968, wall drawing #16 consists of a network of penciled lines, regulated by an internal logic imposed by the artist. generally arbitrary rules such as these are typical of the detailed instructions that the artist produced for each work.
lewitt used traditional materials-oil and pigment on wood-when he produced wall structure blue. the simple, yet striking square set in the middle of the canvas is reminiscent of jasper johns\' handling of the target pieces, which lewitt had seen at an exhibition at moma around the time he produced wall structure blue.
design 1044 illustrates delaunay\'s work in textile design.  delaunay\'s work in this field elevated the field of fabric design to high art.'.
nu jaune or yellow nude exemplifies how delaunay\'s earliest works were quite influenced by fauve artists like matisse and post-impressionists such as gauguin.  although the colors are unrealistic, they are rich and jewel-toned, setting a standard for the rest of her career.'.
a celebration of color, sonia delaunay\'s painting prismes lectriques is focused around two large overlapping circles created by arcs or curved forms of primary and secondary colors placed one beside the other. in this painting we see how sonia tried to replicate the way these artificial lights cast colors onto the sidewalk beneath with by sketching rapid, semi-circular colored lines.
here the canvas is clearly split into two sections. thirty years after her first exploration of colored rhythm painting, there is a new development of geometric shape in her work.
the left figure wears a black dress with a ruffled skirt that creates a jagged silhouette. delaunay\'s robes simultanes (trois femmes, forms, couleurs) (1925) depicts three dressed mannequin-like, featureless forms.
delaunay\'s passion for exploring the way complementary colors (one primary with one secondary) reacted to one another, was not contained to fine art. this dress is of particular importance because it was one of the earliest examples of her unique "simultaneous" dresses.
this composition displays the aspiring purity of the constructivist mode that sought the absolute and the non-human through geometric forms. the overlapping hard-edged geometric forms emphasize taueber-arp\'s allegiance with the circle and square (cercle et carre) group of artists, founded the same year as this painting.
taeuber-arp and arp produced these works together so closely that is impossible to tell who made what - did arp design and taeuber-arp execute? this work is one example of a set of compositions that taeuber-arp and her future husband hans arp produced from about 1916-18.
unlike other textiles at this time, elementary forms was made to hang on a wall. elementary forms is one of her earliest constructivist works.
this photograph represents the advent of abstract dance in the 1910s. modern dance teacher von laban had expanded taeuber-arp\'s understanding of dance to include intuitive and abstract movements.
taueber-arp applied the nascent dada strategy of attacking the bourgeois sensibilities of a corrupt world to the decorative arts. note the upturned concave shape, perhaps reflecting the dada belief in the topsy-turvy state of the world.
ginger shore, causeway inn, tampa, florida, november 17, 1977 is indicative of the way in which shore\'s work in uncommon places developed over the course of the 1970s. shore\'s images in uncommon places make an argument for its value at a time when it was frequently dismissed as detracting from form and light.
stephen shore returned to working in black and white in the 1990s, due to a desire to expand his practice through experimentation. in using a camera which posed specific challenges to the genre of street photography, shore creates a new kind of portrait of the people of new york city in which individuals, who cannot be identified in this image, are subsumed into the collective.
this photograph of an intersection in oklahoma is among the image sequence known as american surfaces, taken on shore\'s first drive across the united states. american surfaces captures the textures of post-war life in the united states, focusing not on newsworthy moments, but on specifics which shape the experiences of those living and moving through the country.
in this series, shore turns toward the question of depicting subject matter with a strong emotional charge. from a series that shore shot of holocaust survivors in ukraine, this image shows an elderly man, tsal groisman, smiling as he looks up and out of the left side of the frame.
this painting, which depicts a tenement building located in new york city\'s chinatown, alludes to the social realities of the city\'s immigrant and working class populations.  as an ashcan artist, davis was among the first american painters to express an interest in enlightening and educating viewers on the populist reality.'.
here, davis seems less interested in the occupants of the tenement buildings, instead embracing the modern energy and innovations.  house and street also anticipates the artist\'s reliance on bold color and simplified shapes to articulate energy and rhythm in his mature work.'.
during the 1920s, stuart davis painted table and object still-lifes that, because of the clarity of abstraction, have been designated as cubist-realist. in this case, davis painted a newly mass-produced product - cigarettes - which by 1930 had replaced loose leaf tobacco and rolling papers.
in san pa presents the coffee pot now reduced to a mere cylinder amidst other shapes painted in intense, lively colors. in san pa edges closer to pure abstraction than do some of his earlier canvases, with seemingly disembodied words and indistinct forms.
rothenberg not only repeats the motif of the horse, but also a somewhat abstract and simplified depiction of the hands placed together in prayer. sometimes rothenberg draws hands more obviously, twisted, intertwined, and even puppeteered, but more often they are transformed to become this skeletal looking bridge-type feature.
 blue u-turn demonstrates rothenberg\'s studied but sensuous brushstrokes and how she manifests her poetic, private visions into a visually beguiling work.' blue u-turn began as a portrait of rothenberg\'s husband and famed artist bruce nauman.
the work is humorously titled bugfuck, as the larger figure resembles an arachnid of some sort. however, the larger figure could also be interpreted as an archetypal female goddess with the erect \'male\' figure poking out from her side.
in butterfly the horse occupies nearly the entire picture plane, with one of its hooves and part of its face even cut off by the edges of the canvas. while the background is the same muddy red color as untitled (1974), the horse and the lines that divide the canvas into an "x" shape are rich black.
interestingly though, rothenberg was attracted to the qualities of mondrian that she saw as most unlike her own - "pure and wonderful and disciplined." this is not an anonymous individual but rather the famously meticulous dutch painter, piet mondrian.
in 1974 susan rothenberg began painting her horse series, which would ultimately number more than thirty works and prove to be the most recognizable part of her oeuvre. untitled (1974) is one of the earliest pieces and contains formal elements that the rest of the series would incorporate with only minor divergences.
white raven is a massive work, ten feet wide and painted with all the frosty gray tones of a classic northern renaissance winter scene. a screeching white raven (which does not, of course, exist in nature) is suspended in the void and occupies the left side of the canvas, its head almost cut off by the edge.
with a ph.d. degree in nihonga, murakami masterfully merges the worlds of historical japanese aesthetics and popular contemporary japanese cartoons. dob, created by murakami in 1993, is derived from the japanese slang term "dobozite" which roughly translates as "why?".
looked from another angle, the louis vuitton / murakami collection creates another elitist world for the rich. in 2002, at the invitation of the designer marc jacobs, murakami started his 13-year long collaboration with the fashion brand louis vuitton.
the title itself alludes to the darker aspects of japanese culture - "hiropon" is japanese slang for the narcotic - crystal methamphetamine. this literal connection to the drug culture reveals murakami\'s examination of otaku culture as an illicit form of entertainment.
the composition is inspired by the eighteenth-century artist ito jakuchu\'s compendium of vegetables and insects (1761) that focuses on mushrooms - mushrooms have been long revered in japan for their gastronomic qualities, diversity, and reference to longevity. the mushroom\'s mutant status evokes the horrific and lasting side-effects of nuclear radiation.
as a response to these natural disasters, buddhist monks created artworks that appealed to the grieved victims. the title refers to the japanese legend which states that 500 buddhist monks led by a celebrated chinese buddhist priest helped spread buddhism throughout japan.
she invites the female viewer in as a lover rather than creating an experience for a male viewer as a distant voyeur into this all female public space." art historian joan cox argues that "[lempicka] has chosen to crop her view of the female bathers tightly and give the viewer - a presumably female viewer - the experience of joining in the frolicking.
one of the many portraits of her daughter kizette, this painting features her dressed in whitish pink from head to foot. although this depiction of kizette is somewhat naturalistic, the style is undoubtedly the so-called "soft cubism" of lempicka and l\'hote.
the shapely curves of rafaela have both a beauty and a strength that lempicka is most famous for. known only to us, the viewers, as "rafaela", she became the main muse and subject for lempicka\'s paintings for over a year.
the sitter\'s large straw hat lends her a sense of drama, but her expression is wry, suggesting unhappiness. instead, works such as the mexican woman feature other segments of society like this woman, who is evidently poor given the holes in her clothing and the tattered straw hat.
the painting was commissioned for the front cover of die dame, a german magazine devoted to promoting the concept of the modern woman. the work offers a new image of modern woman - of unabashed self-determination and unapologetic sexuality.
suzanne bathing marks lempicka\'s return to painting sensual, nude women, although the theme is still emphatically religious: it is a story from the old testament. all of her works from the period tended toward conservatism, although the pictures were clearly produced in her distinctive style.
the musician is one of lempicka\'s genre paintings. additionally, the bright blue dress rejects the customary, drab palette of early cubism.
shortly after forming their group, the guerrilla girls sent this poster to well- known art collectors, pointing out how few works they owned by women artists. addressed "dearest collector", and made to resemble a hand-written letter on powder-pink paper, the rounded cursive script crowned with a frowning flower oozes femininity, exemplifying the scathing sarcasm for which the guerrilla girls were known.
as the guerrilla girls gained fame, they were able to show their work in an array of prominent, meaningful public spaces and reach outside the art world. here her statement "we all have the same civil rights" is taken out of context, and printed large above the words "vote no on the marriage discrimination amendment", an amendment bachmann had supported.
the guerrilla girls, working artists, were finding that they got more attention when dressed as gorillas, an irony that did not escape them. the so-called "advantages" on this list numbers thirteen (i.e. an unlucky number) ways in which women are systematically excluded from art textbooks, exhibitions, and literature.
by the early-21st century, they had begun to critique sexism outside the visual art world. for months leading up to the oscars in 2002, the guerrilla girls displayed this billboard in hollywood because, as "kollwitz" noted "the people we want to reach will see it...
"queen kong," as the guerrilla girls dubbed her, appeared as a hollywood billboard just in time for oscar month.  now associated with the gorilla image every bit as much as the film is, the guerrilla girls have come full circle.'.
this design is an early example of van doesburg\'s use of diagonal organization of rectangles and squares.  in the following year during which he conceived of his related theory of elementarism, and began painting his counter-compositions.'.
 a contrast between dancers and composition viii (the cow) demonstrates the change in his abstraction before and after creating de stijl.' van doesburg used this composition, as well as his preliminary studies, in a treatise on de stijl that he distributed for educational purposes.
this geometrically abstract painting is the most famous work in van doesburg\'s counter-compositions series. it consists of rectangles outlined in black and tilted at 45-degree angles relative to the edges of the canvas.
dating from the beginning of van doesburg\'s career, this work demonstrates the artist\'s willingness to modify his ideas about de stijl\'s aesthetics. the colored lines seem to move in short, quick bursts and then become very static once again.
created after the split with mondrian, simultaneous counter-composition is an example of the artist\'s newly formed theory of elementarism.  thus it seems that two separate and "simultaneous" geometric compositions are overlapped in one painting.'.
 so, long after van doesburg\'s death, mondrian explored some of the themes van doesburg had pioneered.' as van doesburg began to explore the integration of fine, decorative, and applied arts at the end of world war i, stained glass was a frequent choice for his forays into achieving this unification.
 cole would return to religious painting towards the end of his life after joining the episcopal church.' this painting depicts the moment in the book of genesis when god expels adam and eve from the garden of eden.
the consummation of empire is one of a sequence of five paintings entitled the course of empire commissioned by cole\'s patron luman reed, created between 1833 and 1836.  the course of empire shows an artist at the height of his powers, whose grand scope summed up the spirit of a nation.'.
this painting depicts an idyllic scene of outdoor leisure activity, set amongst a glade of trees. other, smaller clusters of people seem to have broken off from the central group, and sit on blankets eating and talking.
upon whitman\'s death, eakins supervised the making of his death mask and served as an honorary pallbearer at the funeral. when he wasn\'t working on commissioned portraits, eakins often chose to create paintings of family and friends, including whitman.
thomas eakins\' painting swimming depicts six nude men swimming in a lake that is set in a lush green country setting. eakins took numerous photographs of these young men swimming, and he presents them on the canvas as they appeared in real life without any romanticizing effects.
behind them, a female nurse stands at attention, presumably waiting to assist in the operation. agnew, standing at the edge of the operating arena, overseeing a procedure in which three doctors perform a mastectomy on a female patient.
an intense scene, eakins\' the gross clinic is large in scale, measuring eight feet wide and over six feet across. samuel d. gross, a teacher and surgeon at the jefferson medical college in philadelphia, engaged in a teaching demonstration of a surgical procedure for the medical students seated behind him.
the subject of this work, louis n. kenton, was connected to the artist briefly during his short, troubled marriage to eakins\' wife\'s sister. this painting features a full length image of a middle-aged man dressed in a black suit with white shirt, black shoes, and gold wire glasses.
thomas eakins\' william rush carving his allegorical figure of the schuylkill river depicts philadelphian sculptor and ship carver, william rush, known for his allegorical works. in his studio, rush stands in the background, carving a female figure based upon the nude woman posing in the foreground.
the focus of thomas eakins\' painting wrestlers features two young males locked in a wrestling hold. while eakins never shied away from depictions of the nude figure, this work is arguably his most direct, confrontational look at the male form.
amidst the abundance of beautiful trees in the peaceful free woodlands, rural folk are seen moving across a serpentine path that activates the deep stillness of the woods. gainsborough was perhaps, one of the earliest artists to have conveyed a statement against urban development via a retreat into nature through landscape painting.
a young cottage girl holding a dog in her left arm and a pitcher in her right is portrayed by thomas gainsborough here. created at the end of his career, this painting is one among the variety of "fancy pictures" by the artist.
lady georgiana cavendish, the fifth duchess of devonshire gazes out of the picture frame straight at the viewer, who is then further captivated by her tantalizing half-smile. in one arm she holds a blooming rose and in the other a pink rose bud is held between her delicate fingers.
thomas gainsborough\'s mountain landscape with shepherd features a shepherd tending his sheep on the banks of a pond amidst hilly as well as mountainous terrain. this landscape painting marks a departure for the artist from his previous focus on naturalism with more exact depictions of locations.
however, this work is unusual and deviates from that tradition in more ways than one, for instance mr. and mrs. robert andrews, while mrs.
regardless of the motive, in creating a work that moves beyond the canons of a historical portrait gainsborough transcends prior norms. titled rather literally, the blue boy is the first try that gainsborough takes at presenting a full length portrait in a van dyke-style costume, that is, knee breeches and a slashed doublet along with a laced collar.
a pastoral scene, thomas gainsborough\'s the market cart, depicts a family, traveling on a cart down a tree-lined diagonal path from left towards the right foreground of the canvas. with this, the last landscape work of his life and career, gainsborough returned to depicting the english countryside.
based upon a popular folk song that benton felt was representative of missouri lore and mythology, the tale of frankie and johnny might have in fact concerned an incident. the eye travels the length of the six characters in a curvilinear line typical of benton\'s dynamic compositions and figures.
standing bare chest alongside his scantily clad wife, rita, benton\'s self-portrait is among the most startling figure subjects of the early 1920s. painted in martha\'s vineyard, in this work benton renounces his earlier experimentation in cubist-inspired abstractions.
"lewd, immoral, obscene...the lowest expression of pure filth"-- wrote one critic in condemnation of benton\'s interpretation of susanna and the elders. based on the religious parable from the book of daniel, benton recasts the tale within rural america.
the work illustrates an old ozark folk song of the same name in which a man stabs his wife on account of her supposed infidelity, only to find out later that his suspicion was unfounded. this work is typical of benton\'s devotion to sound and music-making in his painting career.
in contrast the nude is usually read as spiritual love, a symbol of simplicity and purity. the woman to the left is dressed in wedding attire and may represent carnal love and beauty.
the painting was unfinished at titian\'s death and was completed by palma il giovane, although it seems that giovane\'s contribution to the image was fairly minimal. it has been suggested that nicodemus is a self-portrait and that titian is either viewing his own imminent death in christ\'s face or touching his body in the hope of salvation.
the impact of this continued into the seventeenth century and examples include equestrian portrait of the duke of lerma (1603) by rubens and equestrian portrait of philip iv (c.1635) by velazquez. charles v is represented on horseback, as a true soldier, fighting for catholicism against the threat of protestantism.
 manet\'s painting demonstrates the powerful influence of titian\'s venus in representing fleshy and sensual feminine beauty.' this painting comes from a long tradition of representations of venus and it appears to have been based on giorgione\'s sleeping venus (1510), although titian\'s interpretation of the goddess is much more erotic.
in the original story venus leaves first, whereas here, titian inverts the events and portrays adonis leaving, possibly to add more emotional drama to the subject matter. in the image venus pleads with adonis to stay and tries to restrain him (as she has had a premonition of his death).
while he insisted there was no psychic depth to his art, wesselmann\'s paintings work a slow magic on our senses.  he began the bedroom paintings in the late 1960s, and from 1978 onward they adhered to the diagonal structure seen here, with a woman\'s face in the foreground.'.
 cleverly arranged pairings between the private space of the bedroom and public sphere of contemporary politics are a hallmark of wesselmann\'s oeuvre.' over-the-top patriotic decor introduces a comic element (the insistent red white and blue palette, star and stripe motifs on the wall, red curtain, and blue and white sheets.
the disembodied mouth is unmistakably wesselmann, a kind of visual calling card for the artist. wesselmann began his series of mouth paintings in 1965.
though wesselmann rejected the label of pop art, this piece is an iconic work of the 1960s that fits squarely within the movement. pop art consciously moved away from the abstract expressionism of the 1950s, instead embracing cultural specificity.
in homage to his favorite early-20th-century artist, wesselmann paints two women reclining in a classic pose favored by matisse. painted the year before his death, this exuberant painting is a riot of bright, overlapping planes of color, and sums up wesselmann\'s life-long ambition to paint an american nude that rivaled that of matisse.
sharing affinities with both architecture and sculpture, the bennington structure was a temporary abstract installation built on the grounds of bennington college in vermont. smith described his exploration of shape and correlation in the bennington structure as a "speculation in pure form".
the 20-foot sculpture light up was commissioned as a public artwork for downtown pittsburgh. aesthetically thrilling, the sculpture has been pithily described by art historian harriet senie as meeting the requirements of both public art and art.
the louisenberg series (1953-55) is a suite of twenty-five colorful, geometric paintings, bound together by an underlying compositional ideal. the louisenberg series thus represents a fascinating synthesis of smith\'s north-american and northern-european artistic affinities and influences.
standing at 24 by 47 by 33 feet, smoke is the largest sculpture that smith ever realized in full scale.  indeed, the troubling of that conceptual and aesthetic boundary - like that between art and architecture - is one of the unique distinctions of smith\'s art.'.
raised off the ground, stamos house has been likened to a spaceship. the art historian robert storr notes that prior to working on the stamos house, smith had studied alexander bell\'s experiments with chinese kites (1901), and buckminster fuller\'s dymaxion house (1944-46), which was also designed to be raised off the ground.
the piece is emin\'s record of several days spent in bed in the grip of depression. this object is her actual bed resulting from being bedridden after an end of a personal relationship.
in this work, emin returns to the theme of the intimacies of one\'s bedroom, but rather than presenting an unmade bed that she herself had slept in, she presents a perfectly made bed with an elaborate metal frame, which is covered with hand-embroidered fabrics.  the images and words embroidered into the quilts, pillows, and hangings create a portrait of a young girl: her fears, sexuality, and experiences of abuse. '.
 the film ends with the older emin dancing in an unfurnished room with a smile on her face as a rejection of the group of men from her past. ' after she turned 15, she says, she wasn\'t interested in sex any more, and turned to dancing instead.
tzara\'s efforts in these works of typographic collage share a lot with those of other dada artists including janco. this bulletin illustrates tzara\'s "cut-up" style wherein pieces and morsels of previously printed material were gathered and juxtaposed in what seems a random manner, coming together to form an artwork as if by accident.
this missive, primarily instigated by tzara, outlined the goals of the dadaglobe project as well as clearly presenting its stylistic idiom.  almost one hundred years later, on the 100th anniversary of dada\'s founding, the kunsthaus zrich brought the dadaglobe artworks and writings together for the first time and completed tzara\'s original project with the publication of dadaglobe reconstructed.'.
landscape is an example of a drawing produced during a dada game known as exquisite corpse. it was the product of a game involving tzara, valentine hugo, andre breton, and tzara\'s wife, the swedish poet greta knutson.
the simplified forms and bright palette of this work reflect the artist\'s attraction to "primitive art," and in particular - african art.  his passion for africa never waned and in the last year of his life he travelled there to attend a congress on african art.'.
this self-portrait demonstrates boccioni\'s style as a student at the academy in rome. although it differs greatly from his mature futurism, being far softer in its tone and brushwork, he cherished the picture and never sold it during his lifetime.
nevertheless, the city rises does capture the group\'s love of dynamism and their fondness for the modern city. the city rises is considered by many to be the very first truly futurist painting.
the geometric elements and the perspectival distortion in the the street enters the house demonstrate the influence of expressionism and cubism on boccioni.  according to the original catalog entry for the work, "the dominating sensation is that which one would experience on opening a window: all life, and the noises of the street rush in at the same time as the movement and the reality of the objects outside."'.
although boccioni was a painter first and foremost, his brief forays into sculpture are significant.  possibly in homage to auguste rodin\'s walking man (1877-8), and the famous greek statue nike of samothrace (220-190 b.c.), boccioni left the sculpture without arms.'.
it is one of a series of body configurations that export undertook in the mid-1970s in the krperkonfigurationen (body configurations) series (1972-76). in this photograph a woman traces the viennese urban landscape with her body, arching her back so as to mirror the curve of the curb.
through the engagement with everyday objects, smart export connects this to the artist\'s interest in mass media and advertisement. smart export is a photograph in which the artist replaces the branding on a pack of cigarettes with her own image and logo.
the tactile reception stands against the deception of voyeurism [...] tapp und tastkino is an example for the activation of the audience through new interpretation." tapp und tastkino then, offers a challenge to the patriarchal structures of film and, in art historian roswitha mueller\'s terms, represents "a woman\'s first step from object to subject.".
unsichtbare gegner (invisible adversaries) is export\'s first feature film. unsichtbare gegner is simultaneously a commercial and a fine art film.
instead of monet\'s light-dappled haystack, bell uses muted browns and greens in flat swaths to construct the sculptural pile of hay and the rest of the landscape. while bell pays homage to monet in her choice of subject matter - a large haystack dominates the landscape - she emulates czanne in her compositional structure and paint handling.
named after the london socialite, lady maud cunard, the textile design maud features large swatches of blue, green, and orange passages broken up by thin, dark brown lines. the repeating pattern would have been stenciled on large pieces of fabric, and in fact, bell used maud for curtains in her gordon square home.
a large yellow vase dominates the center of the canvas, and an explosion of green leaves, lemons, and oranges spill out of it. the influence of post-impressionism is clearly on view, and yet bell succeeds in making works that are distinctly her own.
in this self-portrait, vanessa bell dominates the canvas. while she had an active social life among those in her inner circle, she was often reserved and avoided the social spotlight.
this is one of the many paintings bell created that used her home, charleston, as the setting. unlike other early modernists who made concerted efforts to avoid such themes, for the bloomsbury group, modernism was intricately linked to domesticity.
in his anatomy of desire series, brauner sketched diagrams of female figures with the additional of mechanical elements, each image also contains explanatory notes. brauner continued to explore the human (usually female) body as a fragmented form in subsequent works, such as mitsi (1939), and homme idal (1943).
in this work, brauner adopts the flattened styles of egyptian art. brauner began using this technique when he was forced to flee paris during world war ii and was unable to obtain his usual materials.
brauner first rendered the combination of a fox and a table in two paintings completed in 1939 (fascination and psychological space). brauner adds an element of both humor and sexualization to the piece through the inclusion of the fox\'s stuffed testicles.
brauner had a large collection of primitive art and it is likely that he used his collection for inspiration.  this can be seen as a purification of form and a return to the basic tenants of art having experimented with a wide range of other styles and movements on they way.'.
self-portrait with plucked eye shows the artist\'s face with his eye missing and the eye cavity hanging open. this image is more representational than many of brauner\'s works, depicting a self-portrait painted in the mirror, accurate apart from the eye.
this cityscape, with its bold colors and illustrative style shows the influence of italian surrealist painter giorgio de chirico on brauner. in this image brauner takes de chirico\'s concept and interrogates it through the replacement of buildings with body parts and items of clothing.
in this directly autobiographical work brauner depicts himself as a young man, using the surrealist tarot card image of the magician (also known as the juggler) as a basis. the surrealists held a strong interest in tarot, and often used tarot imagery in their art.
the aubecq house (since demolished) was one of horta\'s residences to feature furniture designed by him. horta frequently designed all of the aspects of his buildings, including large amounts of furniture, and was a talented interior designer.
horta\'s own house and studio are now home to the horta museum and constitute an important example of his surviving work. at ground level, the house catches the viewer\'s attention with the sinuous curves of horta\'s signature ironwork and the i-beam used as a lintel over the double window left of the main entry, hinting at the house\'s industrial methods of construction.
the tassel house, often cited as the first art nouveau building.  in this way horta creates a subtle play between nature and industry, with each complementing each other as essential components of the building.'.
as in the solvay house, horta was given an immense amount of freedom in design, in this case, for lopold ii\'s minister for congolese affairs. the van eetvelde house represents arguably the most daring and innovative of horta\'s residences in brussels, built in two primary stages; the initial one from 1895-98 and an extension constructed from 1899-1901.
the maison du peuple was a masterwork of design on several levels. it was in many ways a temple of socialism, as the maison du peuple was a common urban structure in several european countries.
horta worked on an irregular, sloping site, whose ground was generally sandy and wet, and was subject to several constraints.  the building also contains several other small theaters and performance spaces, a sculpture hall (now named after horta), exposition galleries for the visual arts, and a cinema.'.
vasarely\'s alphabet plastique is generally considered his most important contribution to twentieth-century art, perhaps because it was so exemplary of its era. alphabet vr consists of various simple, geometrical forms, altered by rotation or partial erasure and organized into a square grid.
works such as ambigu-b partly express the more spiritual, cosmically-focused aspects of vasarely\'s imagination, which offsets the scientific rigor of his compositional approach. "in this manner", vasarely noted, "the structure becomes more dynamic, yet visually more labile".
sophia consists of a grid-like pattern of black lines set against a white background, creating subtle various illusions of movement and three-dimensionality. a triptych version of sophia was installed as a wall-mural at the university of caracas, venezuela, in 1954.
vega iii features an early example of one of vasarely\'s most iconic visual effects, with the distinctive chequerboard pattern distorted in certain areas to create illusions of concave and convex shapes within the picture surface. in generating impressions of movement within a static, two-dimensional artwork, vasarely was ingeniously advancing the principles of kinetic art as laid down by artists such as alexander calder and naum gabo.
works such as vega-nor date from a period when op art was finally being defined and celebrated as a coherent movement. vega-nor, like earlier works such as alphabet vr, was composed using the grid-based system of the "alphabet plastique", but in this case the picture-surface created by the rows of squares is warped.
 vasarely returned to the zebra as a visual motif throughout his career, notably creating a sculpture based on this early work in 1965.' in this early work, created while vasarely was a graphic designer in paris, two zebras twine around each other against a black background.
after van gogh left the asylum at saint-remy in may 1890 he travelled north to auvers, outside of paris. church at auvers is one of the most well-known images from the last few months of van gogh\'s life.
van gogh\'s sunflower series was intended to decorate the room that was set aside for gauguin at the "yellow house," his studio and apartment in arles. van gogh used the sunny hues to express the entire lifespan of the flowers, from the full bloom in bright yellow to the wilting and dying blossoms rendered in melancholy ochre.
van gogh depicts gachet seated at a red table, with two yellow books and foxglove in a vase near his elbow. gachet was the homeopathic physician that treated van gogh after he was released from saint-remy.
after cutting off a portion of his right earlobe during a manic episode while in arles, van gogh painted self portrait with a bandaged ear while recuperating and reflecting on his illness. the strong outlines of his coat and hat mimic the linear quality of the japanese print behind the artist.
van gogh\'s bedroom depicts his living quarters at 2 place lamartine, arles, known as the "yellow house".  this personal interpretation of a scene in which particular emotions and memories drive the composition and palette is a major contribution to modernist painting.'.
while in paris, van gogh was exposed to a myriad of artistic styles, including the japanese ukiyo-e woodblock prints. van gogh collected works by japanese ukiyo-e masters like hiroshige and hokusai and claimed these works were as important as works by european artists, like rubens and rembrandt.
this early canvas is considered van gogh\'s first masterpiece. it is not surprising that van gogh\'s brother, theo, found it impossible to sell paintings from this period in his brother\'s career.
 the diagonal wires are evocative of a musical instrument and were perhaps inspired by tatlin\'s experience as a musical instrument maker.' corner counter-relief evokes the dynamism of modernity, with the various intersecting lines overlapping and moving in different directions to create rhythm and tension.
tatlin\'s last major work, the innovative letatlin, proves his talent as a visionary. through his persistent experiments with materials, tatlin had gained an understanding of and appreciation for natural structures, and sought to emulate them.
the tower, which was never fully realized, was intended to act as a fully functional conference space and propaganda center for the communist third international. monument to the third international, also sometimes known simply as tatlin\'s tower, is his most famous work, as well as the most important spur to the formation of the constructivist movement.
the bottle is tatlin\'s earliest known relief. indeed, tatlin later said that picasso was one of the three painters who influenced him most.
here, tatlin fragments the image and separates it into various planes, using heavy outlines to provide definition. instead, tatlin employs curvilinear lines and rounded forms, and predominantly a palette of three colors.
shot on assignment for the farm security administration in november of 1935, this quiet, unassuming view of the steel manufacturing town of bethlehem, pennsylvania reflects evans\'s mastery of poetry in visual form. though shot in a residential neighborhood, there are no figures in this quiet elegy to the generations of steel workers for whom life begins and ends here.
in 1941 their collaboration was assembled into a book entitled let us now praise famous men. refusing to dramatize poverty, this series of unlabeled photographs captured the great depression as stark, truthful tragedy.
one of the many photographs rejected for publication in the book, citizen in downtown havana, cuba was one of evans\'s personal favorites. in 1933, evans traveled to havana to shoot photographs for carlton beals\'s the crime of cuba (1933), a book denouncing the corruption of dictator gerardo machado.
"the guard is down and the mask is off," walker evans wrote of his subway portraits, a series of subway commuters shot with a hidden camera from 1938 to 1942 that reflects his brilliance as a storyteller. with a 35 mm contax camera fastened to his chest and a rigged cable release in his hand, evans captured scores of people deep in conversation, immersed in their reading, or lost in thought.
in 1946, evans turned his attention on an assignment for fortune to capture the spirit of the american worker. still wishing to investigate the balance between authenticity and anonymity explored in his subway portraits, evans spent an afternoon on a detroit sidewalk photographing anyone who came by.
in the 1960s, evans ended two decades of work at fortune magazine and accepted a professorship at yale. evoking the work of eugene atget, evans\'s personal hero, evans captures sagging chairs, rumpled bedding, and half-opened doors in great detail as if to preserve these weary structures for eternity.
as the mile long drawing disappears into its desert landscape it reflects upon time and memory. this work consisted of two parallel lines drawn with chalk twelve feet apart, extending for one mile in the mojave desert in california.
the new york earth room is both an art installation and an earth sculpture re-located in an interior setting. he highlighted the natural world while implying a critique of the usual material practices and values of the art world.
this work consists of three brushed stainless steel sculptures, each approximately 3 feet (1 meter) inwidth and length. asian influence was large during the 1960\'s in american art, as artists sought to transform human consciousness through a religious-like contemplation present in asian philosophies.
this work is a one kilometer long solid brass rod that is five centimeters in diameter. the long rod extends through six geological layers in one continuous kilometer.
away from the main site, gropius designed houses for the bauhaus masters and their families. all the interior fixtures and fittings were designed and produced in the bauhaus workshops, building community and encouraging collaboration between departments.
the graduate center at harvard university was designed by gropius in conjunction with the younger architects that made up the architects\' collaborative. built to house 575 graduate students, the building complex consists of a main building, seven dormitories, a dining hall, and recreational rooms.
the competition committee chose gropius\'s design from several submitted, and erected the monument in the weimar central cemetery. the lightning bolt rising from the main body of the monument suggests dynamism and the continued living spirit of those that died.
in addition to sommerfeld house, gropius and meyer were tasked with designing four houses on the same plot for employees of the sommerfeld company. sommerfeld house is perhaps not instantly recognizable as a work by the architectural avant-garde of the period.
gropius designed the faade of this factory in conjunction with adolf meyer in the period after they left the office of peter behrens. the entrance and clock date from a 1913 expansion to the building, also designed by gropius and meyer.
commonly cited as the pinnacle of kandinsky\'s pre-world war i achievement, composition vii shows the artist\'s rejection of pictorial representation through a swirling hurricane of colors and shapes. even the title, composition vii, aligned with his interest in the intertwining of the musical with the visual and emphasized kandinsky\'s non-representational focus in this work.
the rational, geometric order of composition viii is a polar opposite of the operatic composition of composition vii (1913).  kandinsky relied upon a hard-edged style to communicate the deeper content of his work for the rest of his career.'.
influenced by the flowing biomorphic forms of surrealism, kandinsky later incorporated organic shapes back into his pictorial vocabulary. executed in france, this monumental painting relies upon a black background to heighten the visual impact of the brightly colored undulating forms in the foreground.
these influences would remain part of kandinsky\'s style throughout the rest of his career, with bright colors dominating his representational and non-objective canvases. he presented a bright blue mountain, framed by a red and yellow tree on either side.
kandinsky painted the landmarks in a circular fashion as if he had stood in the center of red square, turned in a circle, and caught them all swirling about him. at first the move to moscow in 1914 initiated a period of depression and kandinsky hardly even painted at all his first year back.
kandinsky painted this work in his sixtieth year and it demonstrates his lifelong search for the ideal form of spiritual expression in art. "the circle," claimed kandinsky, "is the synthesis of the greatest oppositions.
in balcony seats at a murder, weegee captures police investigating a man who has just been killed outside his shop, while onlookers gawk at the scene from the tenement\'s fire escape. by including the action surrounding the victim, weegee set himself apart from other photojournalists, who instead focused their lens solely on the victim.
in body of girl hit by car on park avenue, new york, is a simple, but moving image about the outcome of a typical, yet gruesome car accident. weegee creates a powerful work by focusing on the dead body lying in the street covered by a white sheet.
i cried when i took this picture depicts the central drama of a devastating fire, the shrieks of ms. here\'s the people effected by the burning building.\'" weegee insisted on having this image published, as he said, "[to try to] humanize the news story.".
in marilyn monroe distortion, weegee uses a kaleidoscope lens to manipulate a portrait he took of marilyn monroe.  today these images are recognized as important precursors to pop art.'.
the sign across the center of the building that reads: "simply add boiling water," lends this image its title.  simply add boiling water could easily pass as a still from one of these films.'.
tenement sleeping during heat spell, lower east side, new york, depicts a group of children as they sleep curled together on a fire escape, during a new york heat wave. recalling that night, weegee writes, "in summer i always keep an eye out for hot weather pictures.
weegee captures the startled crowd\'s varied reactions to seeing the murder of a gambler in broad daylight.  on facing pages, weegee presented his bystanders and showed the gambler\'s bloody body lying in the street.'.
in 1947, de kooning embarked on a series of black and white abstractions. attic is one of the best known among these, having been widely exhibited in the years after its completion.
excavation marked the culmination of de kooning\'s abstract phase of the 1940s.  this classic example of action painting was among the last works completed before de kooning returned to color and the figure with full enthusiasm in his women series.'.
in the late 1950s de kooning temporarily left aside his preoccupation with women, and began to explore landscape, although there often seem to be few direct references to landscape in these paintings. these works from the late 1950s and early 1960s were made during the period in which de kooning and franz kline shared a relationship of mutual influence, and the structure underlying july 4th is certainly reminiscent of kline.
seated woman was de kooning\'s first major painting of a woman, and it evolved, curiously, out of a commission for a slightly earlier picture, portrait of a woman (c.1940).  seated woman was also undoubtedly influenced by arshile gorky, in particular the figurative the artist and his mother, which gorky worked on for almost fifteen years after 1926.'.
in this late painting from 1985, de kooning greatly simplified his brushstrokes and colors.  the 1990s saw a vigorous debate about the quality of the painter\'s late work, critics asking whether it derived from his intellect, or from his intuition.'.
the woman depicted in woman i is wholly unlike anything seen in western painting - she is highly aggressive, erotic and threatening. woman i is noteworthy not only for this process, but also because it embodies two major themes in de kooning\'s work.
like his earlier women series, these are highly abstract, but they are less ferocious, and more obviously eroticized, with bright red lips and long blond hair that border on caricature. this work is typical of de kooning\'s style upon returning to the figure, which he began to do with a new series of paintings of women, shortly after moving permanently to long island.
this work represents baziotes\'s mature style: abstracted, biomorphic forms that float in a sea of muted, soft color. the lack of a defined space for the forms gives the work a timeless feel, while the forms themselves have become less menacing and jagged.
this work is one of a group of paintings from 1947 that are all distinguished by a single figure dominating the composition. dwarf instead captures the gruesomeness and violence of war in its reference to a mutilated figure without arms who has oversized, sharp teeth.
in flesh eaters the soft application of paint creates a soft lyrical or poetic quality that contrasts markedly with the title of the work and thus creates ambiguity. in the early 1950s the artist turned more to abstracted depictions of nature with less of a focus on surface and paint handling and, indeed, baziotes began to eliminate brushwork altogether by repetitive rubbing of the oil paint on the surface.
this work stands out in baziotes\'s oeuvre because of its reference to a specific geographic location and its strong use of color. the all-over, dominating red evokes the fiery and dramatic end of pompeii in the explosion of mt.
in this, perhaps blake\'s most famous visual artwork, the mathematician and physicist isaac newton is shown drawing on a scroll on the ground with a large compass. blake\'s isaac newton has been the subject of numerous reproductions, homages, and reinterpretations, and the figure of newton himself is probably blake\'s best-known visual image, perhaps because it sums up his creative credo so perfectly.
it seems to portray two cherubim, one of whom holds a baby, on white horses in a darkened sky, jumping over a prostrated female figure. blake\'s use of blues and greens, contrasting with the whites of the figures, grants the work a nocturnal, dreamlike quality.
songs of innocence and experience, a collection of poems written and illustrated by blake, demonstrates his equal mastery of poetry and art. songs of innocence was initially published on its own in 1789.
adapting the details of this scene, blake places the two angels hovering above jesus\'s body, probably portraying the moment just before his resurrection. following his crucifixion, jesus\'s body was buried in a cave or tomb.
the ghost of a flea is a singular manifestation of blake\'s unique spiritual and imaginative temperament. this delicate tempera painting, finished in gold leaf, depicts the ghost of a flea, represented as a combination of man and animal, staring into an empty bowl or cup.
this ink and watercolor work depicts a hybrid creature, half human half dragon, spreading its wings over a woman enveloped in sunlight. like blake\'s newton, his great red dragon is an image which has permeated artistic and popular culture, particularly during the 20th century.
the lovers whirlwind illustrates a scene from the fifth canto of the inferno, the first book of the divine comedy (c. 1308-20), by the medieval florentine poet dante. the divine comedy commission was left incomplete as blake died in 1827, having produced only a few of the paintings.
in this early work, eggleston captures a scene inside a convenience store. here he has created a picture of an everyday scene.
an old house peeks out from behind the gas station, while new cars are parked in what could be a rundown gas station in the foreground. in this work, a lone man crosses the street, walking towards a citgo gas station with his back to the photographer.
one of eggleston\'s most famous pictures, untitled (greenwood, mississippi) also known as the red ceiling, depicts a closeup view of the intense, red ceiling and far corner of a friend\'s guest room. in the lower left corner, a black door or window frame is cropped just enough to suggest a threshold.
in this iconic work, a weather-beaten tricycle stands alone - monumental in scale - in the foreground of this suburban scene. this ordinary scene draws our attention to the importance of the tricycle in suburban america.
in untitled (sumner, mississippi), a white man with his hands in his pockets and wearing a black suit stands in front of a black man wearing a white servant\'s jacket also standing with his hands in his pockets. as eggleston puts it, "it\'s like they\'ve been together for so long they\'ve started standing the same way.".
the experience with this rather casual picture changes, once the viewer realizes it is a snapshot of eggleston\'s son winston when he was 21 years old. eggleston\'s portraits feature friends and family, musicians, artists, and strangers.
here, glackens moves from documenting his world to more overtly organizing it into blocks of color and patterns of shape. a crowd of people is arrayed on the sand, under a row of umbrellas that alternate brilliant panels of orange and white.
while his stylishly dressed partner is unidentified, glackens included his own wife in the mirrored reflection behind the couple. indeed, in depicting a nightclub and composing the canvas to feature the central figures in front of a mirror, glackens referenced edouard manet\'s bar at the folies bergere.
this unusual and provocative nude announces glackens\'s interest in the avant-garde as he remakes edouard manet\'s olympia for the 20th century. even as he makes it clear that his nude is merely an artist\'s model and a real woman, he includes an apple in her hand.
the artist\'s son, ira, later remembered that his father set up a makeshift soda fountain in his studio and kept the models\' dresses draped on the chairs to ensure accuracy. a celebration of bright color, the soda fountain captures an ordinary scene of contemporary daily life; it is the type of subject that had been common among the ashcan school and was newly relevant with the rise of regionalism.
the elements are simple: a colorful bouquet of flowers in yellows, blues, reds, and white, surrounded by a clump of green leaves. this painting was his final work, exemplifying the brilliant colors of his late style.
may morning in magdalen tower, which was framed in a circular copper repouss designed by the artist was hunt\'s last major artistic project, with his eyesight failing and a severe problem of asthma preventing him from further exertions. it is worth lingering over the effort that hunt invested in this painting.
writer and curator jan marsh has explained the background: "reading her possible fate into the subject of his awakening conscience... the awakening conscience depicts a mistress rising from the lap of her lover, elevated - or enlightened - by a sudden realisation of christian truth.
as jacobi observed in her monograph on hunt, "[p]aintings are essential proofs, empirical acts of witness of a spiritual hierarchy not just in their subject matter, but in every natural detail." this painting - one of hunt\'s most iconic - depicts a floppy-eared goat which hunt presented as a symbol of christ.
the painting foreshadows christ\'s death on the cross and seems to mark the moment when christ, realizing his fate, mimics his imminent crucifixion. his shadow falls squarely across the rack of tools on the wall, which serves as a notional representation of the wooden cross.
whereas the majority of his output was polychromatic (and figural) hunt\'s depiction of the thames is notable for its subdued, dour palette and its atmospheric subtlety. the thames at chelsea was most famously painted and etched by whistler (hunt\'s nemesis according to several accounts) and his amanuensis walter greaves.
the green dining room thus embodies the spirit of collaborative artisanship which the company championed. this green dining room (also knonw as the morris room) is one of three refreshment rooms created for the south kensington museum (now the victoria and albert museum) during the 1860s.
red house has been seen as the ancestral home of the arts and crafts movement in britain. in 1904, the german critic hermann muthesius described red house as "the first house to be conceived and built as a unified whole, inside and out, the very first example in the history of the modern home".
strawberry thief is the best known of morris\'s decorative textile designs, one on which he worked for several months before finding a way of printing it successfully. in practical terms, morris took a great deal of interest in the practical craftsmanship of the strawberry thief design, learning the theory of fabric-dyeing and block-printing in order to create a pattern amenable to his chosen production process.
the pages of the kelmscott chaucer have provided enjoyment and inspiration for artists and craftsmen ever since they were published. the kelmscott chaucer, as it is widely known, is one of the defining achievements of the last great artistic project of morris\'s life, the kelmscott press.
the classic design for woodpecker tapestry, however, is the product of his imagination and technical skill alone. most of morris\'s best-known tapestry designs were created in collaboration with artists, such as philip webb and edward burne-jones.
in this section, the poet dante and his guide virgil descend to the eighth circle of hell, where they encounter the tormented souls of "falsifiers" (counterfeiters and fraudsters). the source material for this painting is canto xxx from the "inferno" sequence of the medieval poet dante alighieri\'s divine comedy (1308-20).
bouguereau\'s dawn is the first in a series of four nude studies representing stages of the day, also including paintings entitled dusk (1882), night (1883), and day (1884). bouguereau returned to the marketable motif of the female nude throughout his career, arranging the body in various evocative and illustrative poses, often alluding to myth or literary history.
for this ambitious religious work, bouguereau devised a large-scale interpretation of the classic piet theme, showing the virgin mary mourning the body of christ. a year before completing the painting bouguereau had suffered the traumatic loss of his teenage son george to a sudden illness.
in its technical perfection, bouguereau\'s venus appears realistic, yet she remains displaced from individual identity, safely confined to the role of an ideal. unlike raphael and botticelli\'s nudes, however, bouguereau\'s venus is captured with a refined naturalism indicating the new artistic tastes of the 1870s, without thereby foregoing neoclassical artifice.
bouguereau offered a more sentimental vision of peasant life than realist painters such as courbet and millet, as indicated by works such as the young shepherdess. towards the end of his career, bouguereau painted many rustic genre scenes that proved immensely popular with collectors, including various works on the "shepherdess" theme.
in 2004, xu bing embarked in a new direction, moving away from his language-based works with a series, titled background story, of mixed-media installations. instead of ink on paper, xu bing has placed plant fibers, hemp, paper and other debris against a frosted glass screen, backlit to transform these ordinary materials into something majestic.
in 2012, he published book from the ground, an oppositional treatise from book from the sky (1987), instead of a book that nobody could read, xu bing created a book for everyone. however, book from the ground is not solely a linguistic puzzle, but also reflects the time-consuming anxieties of modern life in its narrative.
first realized in the form of a 604-page, 4-volume book, xu bing replicated its content to become an immersive installation piece. made up of 4,000 hand-carved and printed characters, book from the sky remains xu bing\'s most iconic work to date.
the phoenix project marks a transition in bing\'s artistic career. as such, the phoenix pair have since traveled the world, from the shanghai world expo in 2010 to massachusetts moca to st.
however, instead of frustration with the dichotomies of language, xu expresses a desire for harmony in his square word calligraphy. after years of preparation, he created square word calligraphy, which he often calls new english calligraphy as he transforms english words nearly beyond recognition in the style of chinese characters.
the menacing piece is both aggressive and humorous, and also works to confront kusama\'s sexual phobias. accumulation no.1 is the first in kusama\'s iconic accumulations series, in which she transforms found furniture into sexualized objects.
starting in 1967 until her return to japan, kusama made fewer art objects and instead began experimenting with the performance art of the moment, "happenings". her first anatomic explosion took place on october 15th, 1968 opposite the new york stock exchange.
kusama also placed two signs at the installation that read: "narcissus garden, kusama" and "your narcissium for sale". narcissus garden was kusama\'s first successful experimentation with performance art.
 for kusama personally, her infinity nets have become central to her practice, and continue to influence her work.' created when abstract expressionism was still the popular contemporary art form and minimalism was still in its infancy, the infinity nets were avant-garde for their time.
visitors to the room are handed a sheet of round stickers of various shape and size determined by kusama, and invited to affix them to any surface in the room. in response to the trauma kusama experienced as a child, the first iteration of the room was created specifically for children and to be an idealization of childhood.
kusama has also described the pumpkin motif as an alter ego, once again emphasizing how her work and identity are intrinsically intertwined.  kusama has spent her whole life disassembling her identity and liberating the self through her various artistic practices, and the polka-dotted pumpkin is yet another expression of this endeavor.'.
when one uses the magnifying glass to look at the framed glass panel, one sees the word "yes", written on a tiny piece of paper. a white stepladder at the center of the room leads up to a framed glass panel.
ono\'s cut piece was the first performance piece to address the potential for sexual violence in public spectacle. a landmark work, and one of the artist\'s best-known, cut piece was presented at the sogetsu art center, the same tokyo venue that had hosted her bag piece.
 heavily informed by zen buddhism and dada, the western and eastern traditions with which ono was familiar, the book is regarded as a milestone of conceptual art.' a series of instructions for living, grapefruit contains over 150 written pieces divided into five sections: music, painting, event, poetry, and object.
directions for the work ask the viewer to hammer a nail into the panel, and wrap a strand of his or her hair around it. ono\'s most well-known works of the early 1960s are her "instructional pieces," so-called because the viewer is given instructions to follow.
since the 1990s, yoko ono\'s wish tree has appeared in an array of contexts and countries around the world. like other major works by ono, wish tree relies on audience participation.
after concentrating on the monochrome canvases, klein made a new departure with his signature ikb color, using nude models as his brush. klein crafted this idea into a performance piece, hosting a formal event where guests observed the nude models executing the piece.
this is one of klein\'s first monochromes featuring international klein blue. he reported that, at the age of nineteen, he looked up at the sky and realized the infinite, immaterial space surrounding the universe.
to further his artistic vision of the immaterial, klein created le vide (the void), removing everything from the iris clert gallery except for an empty cabinet. regarding the work klein stated, "my paintings are now invisible and i would like to show them in a clear and positive manner...".
in this and related pieces, klein used gold to direct the public to the cosmos; he believed that gold was symbolic of the absolute, divinity, and infinite space. although klein is best known for his blue monochromes, he also used gold and red, which, together with blue, he regarded as representing the theological mystery of the trinity.
here, klein applies his signature international klein blue to a plaster cast of the famous venus de milo sculpture, pushing the monochrome into the three-dimensional field and establishing a relationship between the infinite cosmos and the human form.  by appropriating the famous greek sculpture and painting it ikb, klein gives the dated masterpiece a kind of kitsch, commercial appeal, making it a precursor to pop art (as klein was at first an enthusiastic member of france\'s pop movement, the nouveau realistes.) but the piece also prefigured his use of live nude women to create his anthropometries series.'.
in 1950 the psychological institute of vienna displayed tanguy\'s paintings beside those of schizophrenic patients to see if the public could distinguish between the two. tanguy relied upon his subconscious to supply him with ideas for paintings: "the painting develops before my eyes, unfolding its surprises as it progresses.".
the artist\'s posthumous retrospective at the museum of modern art in 1955 positioned this work as the culmination of tanguy\'s work. tanguy completed this large work in the months before his death - while working eight to nine hours a day in deep concentration.
this painting\'s fascinating provenance illustrates the reciprocal interplay between surrealism and psychoanalysis. jung kept it in his study, where it influenced (and maybe even helped inspire) his theory of the collective unconscious in 1958.
the ground is covered with forbidding rubble (in 1955, the moma exhibition called a \'breathless congestion of boulders, pebbles and bones\'). in this late canvas, a tower of hard architecture, built from clusters of sharp, spiky objects dominates a steely gray and purple sky.
rock-like forms and a strange tower of balloon-shapes, wheel-spokes and stones inhabit this overcast dreamscape. this otherworldly environment and its unknowable subject reflects a general interest among the surrealists in mystery, ambiguity and transformation.
there is a tradition of performing with masks, and i painted every character with a white mask on." all of the figures also wear white masks with huge, toothy smiles.
like the hospital series, zeng\'s meat series was inspired from his day-to-day experiences. this painting, along with others from the meat series, bears many similarities to his hospital series, with its muted grey-brown color palette and harsh, aggressive brushstrokes.
several smashed watermelons lay strewn around him. we also find western art historical references in this work, particularly to max beckmann\'s selbstbildnis mit rotem schal (self portrait with red scarf) of 1917.
several erratic brushstrokes create a chaotic frenzy of lines superimposed above the natural setting. the title of this work, and others in the same series, this land so rich in beauty, comes from a poem by chairman mao zedong.
zeng was commissioned by the van gogh museum in amsterdam to recreate six of vincent van gogh\'s self-portraits, with his own spin. zeng has admired van gogh since he was a student, saying "i came across his works in the march 1980 issue of meishu, the cover feature of which was dedicated to van gogh.
 this ability to enter a meditative state reflects his buddhist spirituality, which would become a more central aspect in his later works.' throughout the performance, zhang maintained a calm, yet tough, almost meditative demeanor and facial expression.
the red blood stood vividly out against the white canvas, spilling out over the floor and spattering the steps leading to the courtyard. but perhaps most notably the blood red dye and mangled doll parts brought to mind china\'s controversial "one-child" policy (effective 1979-2016).
the features on the head are inspired both by buddha\'s features, as well as the artist\'s own. this work is one of the first that zhang completed upon returning to china and setting up his workshop in shanghai.
there, he stood up and removed the sheet, revealing that he was wearing a muscled body suit made entirely of raw meat. zhang says of the work, "the body is the only direct way through which i come to know society and society comes to know me.
between 13:26 and 13:38 that afternoon, the surveyors\' measurement of the anonymous mountain was 87.393 meters, precisely one meter higher than miaofengshan mountain." climb this mountain and you will find an even bigger mountain in front of you.
in this untitled photograph aaron siskind focused on the regular grid of boarded-up windows on a derelict tenement building. once portals into intimate domestic spaces, the windows represent loss in a community plagued by poverty, unemployment, and racial discrimination.
stevenson's poetic tales of men at war with themselves had dazzled abbott handerson thayer, whose own life was marked by exaltation and despair. but thayer painted over this with the figure of an angel to convey a more encompassing, personal grief.
achilles g. rizzoli lived his entire life in san francisco, working as a draftsman in an architectural office for more than forty years. the kathredal: mother symbolically represented is an architectural personification of his mothers essential attributes: strength, beauty, and spiritual perfection.
achilles g. rizzoli lived his entire life in san francisco, working as a draftsman in an architectural office for more than forty years.  the ytte drawings often explore ideas of his father, who disappeared when rizzoli was nineteen.
ad reinhardts comments about art are markers of an aesthetic and intellectual journey from early cubist-inspired compositions to the black rectangles he made for the last seven years of his life. the matte black surface of abstract painting no. 4 is not read quickly, but close examination reveals subtle blue and plum squares arranged in a cruciform shape.
untitled is a jazzy kaleidoscope of colored rectangles that resembles a collage whose elements are painted rather than pasted. the lively colors and syncopated rhythms owe a debt to reinhardts close friend and mentor stuart davis.
by slowing down, rewinding, and blurring the film footage and contaminating its narrative and soundtrack, adl disrupted the storyline and exposed its social-political omissions. embedded in a humble suitcase, the video also sheds light on the social conditions that propelled puerto rican migration to the mainland and partially inspired the film.
b'in 1957, the year the circular russian satellite sputnik was launched, gottlieb began a series of paintings he called bursts, in which circles hover above calligraphic brushstrokes to suggest the existence of polarities in nature and life. we are for the large shape because it has the impact of the unequivocal.there is no such thing as good painting about nothing. . . . .
as skaters and sledders flocked to the frozen lake and snowy slopes of central park, tait joined them to sketch the winter fun. agnes tait had long wanted to make a large, festive painting of winter revelers in central park, but without a patron she could not take on this project.
since 1970 jennifer bartlett has reworked this iconic emblem of a "house"--a triangle atop a rectangle--to explore how rules and systems govern our lives. close inspection reveals that each dot is unique in shape and character, further destabilizing the picture's tight, organizing grid.
they dont have narrative content; they dont tell stories.  feltus said he seeks silence in his work and believes artshould not merely reflect our surroundings like a mirror, adding to the clutter, but become something more wonderful, more meaningful.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'albert bierstadt\'s beautifully crafted paintings played to a hot market in the 1860s for spectacular views of the nation\'s frontiers. bierstadt was an immigrant and hardworking entrepreneur who had grown rich pairing his skill as a painter with a talent for self-promotion.
 the abstract expressionist jackson pollock once said, "the only american master who interests me is ryder."exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006 jonah is one of ryder's most densely painted canvases.
albert zahn was known as the birdman of door county. zahn was regarded as a devout lutheran, yet he believed the natural world was the most spiritual of places and spent his days in the cedar woods, watching birds and carving.
albert zahn was known as the birdman of door county. zahn was regarded as a devout lutheran, yet he believed the natural world was the most spiritual of places and spent his days in the cedar woods, watching birds and carving.
albert zahn was known as the birdman of door county. zahn was regarded as a devout lutheran, yet he believed the natural world was the most spiritual of places and spent his days in the cedar woods, watching birds and carving.
valdss paintings from the early 1960s fuse interests in european modernism, and indigenous and modern mexican art. untitled (about 1965) recalls paul klees paintings where line drawings appear against varied fields of color.
b'black scarf has the scale and impact of a billboard, but nevertheless offers a tender and intimate portrait of alex katz\'s wife, ada. the image both acknowledges and stylizes the effects of aging on her reserved, fine-boned beauty.
alex prager draws inspiration from the rich color photography of william eggleston and the southern california moviemaking industry. her studio mirrors that of large-scale film productions, resulting in the works that project a distinctive hollywood aesthetic.
b'alexander bogardy, a native of hungary, spent most of his life in the capitol hill neighborhood of washington, dc. in the 1960s and 1970s bogardy became a prolific artist, a period bracketed by a remarkably eclectic array of careers and interests spanning music and dance, prizefighting, mechanical engineering, and cosmetology.  he made numerous highly detailed drawings, with hand-written explanatory text about hair design, skin care, and makeup application to flatter every facial shape.'.
b'american artist alexander calder (1898-1976) is internationally acclaimed for his mobileskinetic abstract sculptures, and stabilesstationary equivalents.  their correspondence also documents calders work on nenuphar, a smaller stabile made specifically for the 1968 opening of the american art museum at its current location.'.
 in fact, calder conjured the entire intricate world of a windswept pond, varying the tendrils to suggest the shadowy presence of birds and fish among the lilies.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006' b'nenuphar was built at calder\'s workshop in france for the 1968 opening of the smithsonian american art museum.
manifest destiny is a post-apocalyptic vision of the brooklyn waterfront submerged beneath elevated waters, a victim of the effects of climate change. on the left, a futuristic suspension bridge is swallowed by the east river while on the right, the historic brooklyn bridge stands in ruinous decay.
this elegant, hallucinatory drawing combines grotesque anatomical fragments, realistic portraiture, and surrealistic fantasy. ossorios state of mind can only be described as tormented, induced by his world war ii experiences, a recent divorce, and his uneasy acknowledgement of homosexuality.
b'in honor pythagoras, per 1per vi, the thousands of shapes and color strokes symbolize the unity that jensen saw behind art and science, feeling and thinking. the colored triangles represent prisms that break white light into brilliant hues, suggesting the mystical insight that jensen felt mathematics offered.
b'when chilean-born artist alfredo jaar moved to new york in 1982, he was troubled to discover that racial tensions still ran high long after the civil rights movement had passed its zenith. in life magazine, april 19, 1968, he manipulated the iconic photograph of dr.
the new york botanical garden, conveniently located next to the zoo, provided plants for dinneen to study. she explained to the pwap, "i am making studies of animals from life at the bronx zoo, and tropical plants, which i will compose together.".
b'for many folk artists, life-changing events such as death, injury, or disease that affects the family may trigger a period of great creativity. ligon enjoyed sewing, crocheting, and quilting, but this garment; this gown, probably her first hospital gown or uniform, shows her remarkable skill.
b'in june moon 1963, four panels show an anonymous highway stretching out on a dark, shadowy landscape.  but for allan darcangelo, the real beauty was in the lines and colors of the journey itself.pop art prints, 2014'.
b'crite thought of himself as an artist-reporter whose assignment was to capture the daily lives of ordinary people.  although crite acknowledged that school\'s out may reflect a romanticized view, it also presents a universal statement about community, stability, and the bonds of family life.\nafrican american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012 '.
the chromatic impact of light blue nursery is dramatic. small blocks of irregularly configured primary colors dance across a bright white surface in horizontal rows that echo the ordered energy of a formal garden.
b'artist alvan fisher traveled to niagara falls during the summer of 1820 when formerly impassable roads were improving and tourism was booming.  guidebooks touted the experience of the niagara staircase as an immersion in god\'s power.\nthe great american hall of wonders, 2011\n'.
b'an ofrenda for dolores del rio draws viewers in with its sumptuous pink fabric, rows of black-and-white pictures, and an arrangement of fanciful objects set in a niche. mesa-bains created this work to honor dolores del rio, the mexican actress who dazzled audiences in the united states and mexico from the 1920s until her death in 1983.
b'mendietas silueta series, produced between 1973 and 1980, explores the connections between nature and the female body.  our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'in chamber, the rough texture of the woodcut surface and outlines contribute to the works expressionistic qualities, while the rich colors lend a decorative balance to the composition.  based on one of amenoffs paintings but considerably altered in scale and color, the print is transformed into an independent work of art.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'model t headquarters, highland park, detroit is one of a series of photographs andrew moore took of abandoned ford motor company buildings that symbolize the end of an era.  "the past," says the artist, "is receding so quickly that time itself seems to be distorted."'.
this intimate study, executed on the spot, captures the daily existence of an idyllic rural homestead. several figures relax on the porch, while two women cut and bind sheaves of wheat in front of a pond.
wyeth steadfastly maintained his dedication to painting the people and places that were familiar to him in chadds ford, pennsylvania, and cushing, maine. the cornfield shown in this watercolor was located near his studio in chadds ford, behind the house of dr.
andy warhol used a photograph from time magazine as the source of untitled (birmingham, alabama). in may 1963, photographers swarmed to catch a glimpse of civil rights demonstrations in birmingham, alabama.
b'mccoy submerges the viewer in a world that unites cosmos and ocean depths. there she did her first night scuba diving and began the night sea series.
no cross, no crown combines references to spiritual belief and botany in a photogram, an image made by arranging objects on lightsensitive paper. when anna k. weaver created her picture, many accomplished women botanists were struggling in vain to join the nations ranks of male professionals.
anne truitt's sculptures give elegant form to her personal experience. her graceful, columnar works take on significance as allusions to places she lived, people she knew, and moments in her own life.
b'at just over 4,700 feet above the valley, half dome is the most iconic rock formation in yosemite national park.  after his death in 1984, a section of the sierra nevada was named the ansel adams wilderness in his honor.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013'.
b'puerto ricans who migrated to the continental united states during the early to mid-twentieth century called the rooftops of tenement buildings tar beaches.  in his playa negra (tar beach) series, martorell juxtaposed migrants prosperous self-image with a glimpse of their tiring labor.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'a virga is a meteorological phenomenon in which precipitation falls from a cloud but evaporated before reaching the ground. april gornik brings this rare weather event to life in storm clouds that hover over a placid body of water.
b'cars and trains, industry and agriculture, trees and smokestacks meet in this busy image of minneapolis, minnesota. two white railroad crossing signs signal an abrupt transition to the confusing complex of commercial structures crowded along the railroad tracks.
b'over the harbor, centerport is one of many small-scale watercolors dove created in his beloved long island, new york, during the last years of his life. in this abstract, lyrical composition, dove captured the essence of the harbor with loosely painted black lines and an earthy palette.
b'arthur dove began creating small watercolors as studies for larger paintings, but he came to appreciate them as stand-alone works and by the 1930s began to include them in exhibitions.  although celebrated as one of the countrys most accomplished abstract artists, dove captures the american landscape through gestural lines and washes of color.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'snow has blanketed this pennsylvania farm, but arthur cederquist\'s painting shows that the farmer is not cut off from the world.  cederquist was clearly proud of the modern technology serving the old but solid wooden farm buildings.'.
b'arthur mathews led a group of progressive californians who believed that fine art and design served the public good. after the san francisco earthquake of 1906, he and his wife, lucia, also a designer, led the effort to rebuild the city\'s fine public spaces.
b'the now-defunct conceptual art group asco coined the phrase no movie to refer to their fabricated film stills of nonexistent films. asco circulated this image to news outlets where it was published as evidence of a real film.
 durand helped promote the idea that the countrys scenery was emblematic of the nations ideals. ' b'the pre-civil war american landscape served as an idyllic reminder of the nations promise, a real-world garden of eden.paintings by durand and other hudson river school artists focused on the arcadian qualities of the landscape.
charles christian nahl and august wenderoth were refugees from germany's revolution of 1848. like thousands before them, they came to california to find their fortunes, but as skilled entrepreneurs rather than adventurers.
"clover" adams, wife of the writer henry adams, committed suicide in 1885 by drinking chemicals used to develop photographs. adams, who steadfastly refused to discuss his wife's death, commissioned augustus saint-gaudens to create a memorial that would express the buddhist idea of nirvana, a state of being beyond joy and sorrow.
violet sargent came from europe to new york in the company of her brother, the portraitist john singer sargent. at a party given at william merritt chase's studio, she met augustus saint-gaudens, who asked to create her portrait.
b'storm clouds blow and rain pelts down on the busy hudson river port and rail hub of kingston, new york. the complex of dock cranes, warehouses, and steam trains struck the artist as characteristic of american life in the 1930s.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities. but awa tsireh\'s work is more than an amalgam of traditional and modernist design.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities. but awa tsireh\'s work is more than an amalgam of traditional and modernist design.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities.  in this way, he redefined contemporary pueblo art and created a new, pan-pueblo style.\nthe paintings in this exhibition were donated to the smithsonian american art museum in 1979 by the hendersons\' daughter, alice h. rossin.'.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities. but awa tsireh\'s work is more than an amalgam of traditional and modernist design.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities.  in this way, he redefined contemporary pueblo art and created a new, pan-pueblo style.\nthe paintings in this exhibition were donated to the smithsonian american art museum in 1979 by the hendersons\' daughter, alice h. rossin.'.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities. but awa tsireh\'s work is more than an amalgam of traditional and modernist design.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities.  in this way, he redefined contemporary pueblo art and created a new, pan-pueblo style.\nthe paintings in this exhibition were donated to the smithsonian american art museum in 1979 by the hendersons\' daughter, alice h. rossin.'.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities.  in this way, he redefined contemporary pueblo art and created a new, pan-pueblo style.\nthe paintings in this exhibition were donated to the smithsonian american art museum in 1979 by the hendersons\' daughter, alice h. rossin.'.
the son of distinguished potters, awa tsireh translated geometic pottery designsinto stylized watercolors that feature the ceremonial dancers and practices of pueblo communities.  in this way, he redefined contemporary pueblo art and created a new, pan-pueblo style.\nthe paintings in this exhibition were donated to the smithsonian american art museum in 1979 by the hendersons\' daughter, alice h. rossin.'.
b'the national register of big trees records the size and location of the largest individuals of over seven hundred species found in the united states. it was discovered within a stand of old-growth forest that was being clear-cut, and now remains as a lone sentinel guarding a deserted landscape.
b'the national register of big trees records the size and location of the largest individuals of over seven hundred species found in the united states. it was discovered within a stand of old-growth forest that was being clear-cut, and now remains as a lone sentinel guarding a deserted landscape.
b'the national register of big trees records the size and location of the largest individuals of over seven hundred species found in the united states. it was discovered within a stand of old-growth forest that was being clear-cut, and now remains as a lone sentinel guarding a deserted landscape.
b'the national register of big trees records the size and location of the largest individuals of over seven hundred species found in the united states. redwoods and giant sequoias have long been highlights for summer tourists, but the champion western redcedar is perhaps a more telling example of the fate of many of these natural landmarks.
b'the photographs in this series reflect on the intense connection our memory can form between people and place. the solemn tone of the images speaks of resignation and vulnerability as currents and eddies slip along the river surface from one frame to the next only to disappear.
b'zanzibar/black rises like a monumental ancient stele, yet this modern sculpture dismantles our expectations for this age-old form. she titled this totemic sculpture after the east african island off the coast of tanzania that, for centuries, was an epicenter of the arab slave trade.
b'barbara krugers dramatic juxtaposition of found photographs and provocative text examines the representation of power in mass-media images. using sign language, gesture, and words to create and contradict meaning, she employs language to question cultural stereotypes.
b'can fire in the park is as much a swirling vignette of thickly applied paint as it is an image of a place. delaney developed a vocabulary of signs -- streetlights, fire hydrants, manhole covers, and zigzagging fire escapes -- that became emblematic riffs on city life.
ben shahn is best known as a social realist who came to prominence during the early 1930s.  shahn was more personal; the pair of folded hands and the suggestion of one body unite the faces within a single figure.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
six months before he died, west looked unflinchingly into the mirror to paint his self-portrait.  his example led generations of american artists to measure their art and professional identities by european standards.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
b'in 1965 andrews began what he called his autobiographical series  memory paintings that dealt with the lives of people he knew during his childhood in georgia. the low vantage point is from the perspective of a child who works the fields behind a parent, as did andrews and his siblings.
b'portrait of black madonna seems to be a straightforward image of a woman. the spout of the coffee pot is three-dimensional -- andrews worked a scrap of fabric around a piece of wood.
aiming to capture the past jostling the present, abbott spent the next five years on a project she called changing new york.in brooklyn bridge, water and dock streets, brooklyn, abbott presented a century of history in a single image. the brooklyn bridge, once a marvel of modern engineering, seems dark and heavy compared with the skeletal structure beneath it.
b'bessie harvey used branches, roots, and found objects to make sculptures that reflected her deep spirituality and spoke about the challenges she had faced. harvey explained that her art came from her own struggle.
the savasan series refers to the horizontal yoga position that describes the seven body centers or chakras. david shapiro conceives all of his paintings and prints as series.
b'a wintry corner of greenwich village lives in this painting as beulah bettersworth knew it when she and her husband inhabited 95 christopher street, a block away. veronica\'s catholic church, whose towers are visible behind the ninth avenue "l" station.
b'cross reference, which directly confronts systems of surveillance and power, was produced as a live performance simultaneously broadcast on two public-access television stations in new york city. beirne directed two camera operators to film the street from separate vantage points in their respective studios.
b'snchez pays homage to pedro albizu campos (1891-1965), the well-known leader of the puerto rican nationalist party. a harvard-trained lawyer and devout catholic, albizu championed social justice and promoted puerto rican independence.
bill traylor was part of the first generation of black people to become american citizens. in his late years, traylor put down a lifetime of memories, dreams, stories, and scenes.
bill traylor was part of the first generation of black people to become american citizens. in his late years, traylor put down a lifetime of memories, dreams, stories, and scenes.
bill viola explored themes of transformation and transcendence from emotional, philosophical, and spiritual perspectives. in the fall into paradise, a single pixel appears in the void, then slowly expands to reveal two figures entwined in an embrace.
in some of thompsons canvases, the artist revisited mythical and allegorical subjects; in others, christ images, madonnas, and christian saints served as vehicles for exploring the battle between good and evil. enchanted rider depicts a figure astride a winged steed whose hoofs trample a devil-like monster.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'violence and decay appear to lurk beneath suffocating webs of nylon in bruce conner\'s arachne.  out of spite, athena transformed arachne into a spider, condemning her to weave webs in the darkness until the end of time. '.
in bone, cup and crab apple, kurland placed aging objects---a wilting crab apple, a bone with dried sinew, and a chipped, rusted cup---in the center of the panel. b'bruce kurland painted tiny still lifes of birds, flowers, fruit, game, and sometimes the debris of contemporary life (beer cans, coke bottles).
bruce nauman is one of the most influential pioneers of film, video, and media art. art make-up, nauman's first "film environment," examines the physical exertion, anxieties, and transformations of art making.
bruce naumans films and videotapes hold a prominent place in the history of media art. in walk with contrapposto, the cameras perspective is fixed at the end of a narrowly constructed corridor.
chagoyas lithograph resembles a pre-columbian maya codex, an accordion-like book printed on amate paper and traditionally read from right to left. his contemporary rendition blends references to several apocalyptic moments  the conquest of the americas, transatlantic slavery, deadly tsunamis, and the disastrous economic downturn of 2008.
painted projection is a playful, closed-circuit television (cctv) installation. abstract geometric shapes are painted directly onto the floor and wall, confusing the televisual space and distorting the architectural perspective.
in response, kim, who is korean american, paintedsixteen panels of the pinkish flesh tones and ligon, who is african american, paintedsixteen panels using various black pigments.  arranged in an austere grid, black &amp; white elegantly underscores racial privilege.'.
b'the blacks opened a small rock shop and refreshment stand along the desert highway in california\'s death valley in 1953. their property, affectionately named possum trot, became home to the fantasy doll show.
text rain is a ground breaking interactive artwork that explores the correspondence between language and the body. jumbling the language of visual representation with the dynamics of spectatorship and interactivity, text rain draws attention to the symbolic codes embedded in our machines, further compounding the spaces we inhabit both virtually and physically.
camilo jos vergara takes pictures of the same urban building or street over several years. when he began 10828 s. avalon blvd., la in 1980, the building housed a humble african american baptist church.
 when his hands got cold, nelson recalled, he "would go to the monkey house in the central park zoo to warm up." artist carl nelson had almost as much fun as the children, drawing by the hour despite the chill of february 1934.
 but holty remained suspicious of abstract art that only meant something to the artist, saying "i would like to paint about the world, not myself."exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006' b'holty believed that abstract forms could express human experiences of space, time, and movement, but only if the artist started with the things he saw around him.
the men of madrid, new mexico, went to work every day in these hulking, rusty buildings that led to the coal mines of the albuquerque and cerrillos coal company. artist carl redin specialized in painting picturesque new mexico landscapes, but to find "the american scene" requested by the pwap, he turned to the mines of madrid.
where tears can\'t stop reflects the violence that alfonzo experienced before he fled with the marielitos exiled by castro in 1980. b'alfonzo borrowed from cuban santera, medieval catholic mysticism, and tarot cards to build a dense network of symbols floating in huge limpid tears.
b'irizarry was active in new york citys pop art circles during the 1960s. he also shared political concerns with other local artists of puerto rican descent who were interested in social justice and the fate of the third world.
 the result is a dynamic work that invites viewers to decipher the shifting relationships between color and form.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013' b'herrera, who left her native cuba for new york city in 1939, is best known for crisp, geometric canvases produced during and after a productive five-year sojourn in paris (1948-53).
b'lomas garzas folk-styled works document the lives of mexican americans and often portray memories of her own family in south texas.  lomas garzas deceptively straightforward images offer uncommon glimpses of american daily life as it unfolds in many chicano communities.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
carrie wills photographs are double portraits that explore the life she shares with her identical twin. having been subjected to stares and double takes my whole life, i use photography to exaggerate the gaze of others.
in running outburst, charlemagne palestine transcribes his movements by recording his voice and motion as he traverses his studio.  a musician and visual artist, palestine transforms his performance into a moving image soundscape that explores the physical and physic dimensions of personal and public space.watch this!: new directions in the art of the moving image.
b'arnoldi studied in los angeles in the 1970s, when art students were taught that "painting was dead." he felt pressured to do something new among a crowd of cutting-edge artists and found his answer on a malibu hillside.
b'the niagara suspension bridge spans more than eight hundred feet above one of the wildest parts of the niagara river. charles bierstadt contrasted the solid, stable bridge with the wild chaos of the unruly river.
b'these plains indian chiefs were among many who traveled to washington to meet with the president to negotiate their territorial rights with the government. the artist painted the chiefs with a war axe, blood-red face paint, and eagle feathers atop their heads, reinforcing the romantic image of indians as savages.
b'bojrquez is recognized for bringing chicano graffiti (or cholo graffiti) into the established art world. bojrquezs works showcase the artistry of chicano graffiti and resonate with traditions of abstract art and calligraphic forms from around the world.
b'charles "chaz" bojrquez began his artistic career "tagging" his neighborhood of highland park, los angeles, in the early 1970s. in somos la luz, bojrquez created a roll-call ofprominent los angeles graffiti artists.
charles christian nahl and august wenderoth were refugees from germany's revolution of 1848. like thousands before them, they came to california to find their fortunes, but as skilled entrepreneurs rather than adventurers.
b'charles goeller would often have passed the dramatic manhattan vista looking north from east 19th street along 3rd avenue to the soaring chrysler building. trained in engineering and architecture, goeller crisply rendered the elevated rail tracks and building facades in precisely receding perspective.
b'in picnic, tiny colorful ceramics depicting food sit atop a pinwheel quilt that rests on miniature cinder-blocks, all handcrafted by the artist.  ledray leaves us to ponder such questions as we delight in the intricate details of the piece.'.
charles pollock was the oldest and jackson pollock the youngest of the five sons of stella may and leroy pollock. when charles left new york in 1935, moving first to washington, dc, and then to michigan, the two brothers did not remain close.
a narrow, winding path entices the viewer into this rocky wilderness in southern california's cuyamaca mountains. artist charles reiffel used bright dabs of red, orange, and blue paint to suggest sunlight sparkling on rain-wet stones and pine needles.
jasper johns transformed symbols and objects into subjects for art. in gray alphabets, johns filled a grid with a continuous, repeating sequence of the letters a through z.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. suction, the epicurean, for example, is believed to correspond to blakes brother robert, and quid, the cynic refers to blake himself.blakes song lyrics range from vulgar to menacing to humorous.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. suction, the epicurean, for example, is believed to correspond to blakes brother robert, and quid, the cynic refers to blake himself.blakes song lyrics range from vulgar to menacing to humorous.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. at age nineteen, charles seliger drew illustrations for songs from the unfinished satire, an island in the moon by william blake (1757-1827), an english poet, painter, and printmaker.written around 1785, the manuscript combines classical greek satire with a critique of one of the intellectual salons of the london bourgeoisie.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. at age nineteen, charles seliger drew illustrations for songs from the unfinished satire, an island in the moon by william blake (1757-1827), an english poet, painter, and printmaker.written around 1785, the manuscript combines classical greek satire with a critique of one of the intellectual salons of the london bourgeoisie.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author.  while old corruption is considered an allegory for sin, the song for which seliger drew o, i say you joe, throw us the ball was the first recorded poem to focus on cricket, an english bat-and-ball sport.abstract drawings, 2012.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. at age nineteen, charles seliger drew illustrations for songs from the unfinished satire, an island in the moon by william blake (1757-1827), an english poet, painter, and printmaker.written around 1785, the manuscript combines classical greek satire with a critique of one of the intellectual salons of the london bourgeoisie.
suction, the epicurean, for example, is believed to correspond to blakes brother robert, and quid, the cynic refers to blake himself.blakes song lyrics range from vulgar to menacing to humorous. each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. suction, the epicurean, for example, is believed to correspond to blakes brother robert, and quid, the cynic refers to blake himself.blakes song lyrics range from vulgar to menacing to humorous.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. suction, the epicurean, for example, is believed to correspond to blakes brother robert, and quid, the cynic refers to blake himself.blakes song lyrics range from vulgar to menacing to humorous.
each of seligers drawings depict one or more of the absurdly named characters from blakes fictional island, some of whom also represent friends and contemporaries of the author. at age nineteen, charles seliger drew illustrations for songs from the unfinished satire, an island in the moon by william blake (1757-1827), an english poet, painter, and printmaker.written around 1785, the manuscript combines classical greek satire with a critique of one of the intellectual salons of the london bourgeoisie.
in study for american interior, 1934, sheeler worked out spatial and color relationships for a painting of the same title.  the red, white, and blue palette of this small watercolor reinforces the american theme.graphic masters ii: highlights from the smithsonian american art museum, 2009.
the young girl cradles a large doll in her arms, protecting the dolls chest with her hand. two figures stare out a narrow window.
charlie willeto was born in din bikyah, the homeland of the din, or navajo, and was trained as a tribal healer or medicine man. by making his figures, willeto challenged a tribal taboo against figural representation in art, but he eventually earned his reputation as a powerful healer and bringer of change.
b'hassam spent many summers on appledore island off the coast of maine. this painting evokes the leisurely, seasonal rhythms of america\'s priveleged families in the last years before the great war.
b'in tanagra (the builders, new york), childe hassam painted an ambivalent image of modern life. at the turn of the twentieth century, the skyscraper symbolized all that was dynamic and powerful in america.
b'in chamber, the rough texture of the woodcut surface and outlines contribute to the works expressionistic qualities, while the rich colors lend a decorative balance to the composition.  based on one of amenoffs paintings but considerably altered in scale and color, the print is transformed into an independent work of art.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'fernandezs installation mimics a museum display that recounts the story of early explorers of the southwest. fernandez photographed herself in the guise of her great-grandmother mara gonzlez, the first member of her family to migrate to the united states from mexico.
b'christine mchorse uses both traditional and contemporary processes for her clay creations. she fired this pot in the old navajo mannerin an outdoor pit using cottonwood bark for fueland coated it with pion pitch.
b'in his early twenties, christo made his way from bulgaria to paris, and eventually settled in the united states in 1964. the abstracted contours of christo\'s package tempt viewers with unseen contents.
recently, dawson has begun to make digital scans of multiple negatives to create single, unbroken images. b'christopher dawsons photographs of his relatives and extended family appear to capture distinct moments, but they are in fact constructed from multiple exposures taken in sequence and assembled to form narrative panoramas of interlocking gestures and expressions.
claes oldenburg reconstructed ordinary objects in exaggerated scale and with unexpected materials that defy the nature of the original thing. tea bag includes a large piece of plexiglas -- a hard, industrial material -- molded into the shape of a teabag, an object that in reality is small and soft.
b'claire falkenstein grew up riding her horse along coos bay in oregon and began incorporating animals into her art at an early age.  in falkensteins vision of cattle branding, close inspection reveals the outline of steers, male figures, a branding iron, hooves, and a fence.abstract drawings, 2012'.
b'californian sculptor claire falkenstein was a pioneer in her field, one of a small number of women who shaped new directions in abstract art at mid-twentieth century. like other american artists of her generation, she gravitated to paris after the second world war, and remained there for thirteen years.
clarence and grace woolsey started their yard environment of bottlecap sculptures in the winter of 1961. in the mid-1970s, they began charging curiosity-seekers to view "the world's largest pioneer caparena.".
when she was twelve, her family moved to melrose plantation in natchitoches parish to work as sharecroppers.  this one depicts several notable buildings at melrose, including the big house, yucca house, and african house, in which hunter painted a now-historic mural of plantation life in 1955.'.
during the 1940s, clyfford still developed a personal style of abstraction distinguished by thickly painted surfaces and bold expanses of color.  determined not to influence the viewing experience through literary allusion, he used a combination of dates and letters to identify his works.
he chose to paint george washington in the center of the dome, having ascended to the heavens, looking down upon the visitor. steeped in classical mythology, brumidi presents george washington as zeus, chief among the greek gods, flanked by thirteen female figures representing the original thirteen colonies.
b'consuelo chelo gonzlez amezcua moved to texas when she was ten. though she was unable to follow her dream of going to art school, she still devoted her life to making art.
his paintings and drawings convey thoughts, recorded and repeatedly overdrawn until the imagery forms a visual cloud with a seemingly audible presence. b'dan miller\'s art is a graphic communication made in the moment.
his paintings and drawings convey thoughts, recorded and repeatedly overdrawn until the imagery forms a visual cloud with a seemingly audible presence. b'dan millers art is a graphic communication made in the moment.
artist daniel celentano, an italian american from the uptown neighborhood called italian harlem, saw many a catholic procession like the one shown here. b'this painting fairly bursts with the raucous sounds, pungent smells, and vibrant characters of manhattan\'s ethnic street life.
daniel joseph martinez\'s four-part print conceives the us-mexico border as a place of discovery. b'what if we could see the world anew?.
b'david bates loved this bait shop, which stood for many years on galveston bay. bates believes that the strong brushwork and color contrasts come from his heightened memories, bringing back the experience of the bait shop "even stronger than if you\'re there.".
b'david beck was commissioned to create this work of art for the 2006 reopening of the renovated smithsonian american art museum and national portrait gallery. mvsevm references the history of this building when it was the u.s. patent office, as well as the development of museums in general.
b'cloud music is a synthesis of sound and image, the result of a collaboration between three artists: robert watts, david berhman, and bob diamond.  as sound is composed from light, cloud music is at once a conceptual homage to chance and a technological triumph that inspires a new means to experience the world.watch this!: revelations in media art, 2015'.
b'david butler fashioned a garden of pounded, cut, and painted metal forms around his louisiana house.  butler, with other african americans across the south, blended christian beliefs with folk practices to create spaces that felt self-determined and protective in a world that was often harsh and unpredictable.'.
b'david butler fashioned a garden of pounded, cut, and painted metal forms around his louisiana house. the tiered layers, attached parts, and cut-out shapes created an animated array as wind and sunlight played across his installation.
b'david butler fashioned a garden of pounded, cut, and painted metal forms around his louisiana house. the tiered layers, attached parts, and cut-out shapes created an animated array as wind and sunlight played across his installation.
b'david hockney created the moving focus series of twenty-nine prints from 1984 through 1986. red celia is a portrait of celia birtwell, a close friend and favorite model.
here the artist painted the two attached canvases and floor piece to look like a tiny, tangled world blown up to a preposterous size. b'snails space is both a summary of hockney\'s career and a poignant example of his belief that art should "overcome the sterility of despair.".
in beach profile park has reoriented a traditional beach scene ninety degrees, upending the normal orientation of sea and sand. while the distance seems great, the lengthening shadow cast by the small figure on the beach touches the observers shoulder, suggesting a connection.
david shapiro conceives all of his paintings and prints as series. the savasan series refers to the horizontal yoga position that describes the seven body centers or chakras.
in the mid-1930s, smith began drawings for a series of fifteen relief sculptures he called medals for dishonor, an ironic reference to the nations highest military decoration, the medal of honor. smith believed that groups such as the ku klux klan and the german-american bund, a pro-nazi organization, represented fascism in america.
in 1934, david smith set up a studio in an industrial workshop and used skills he learned as a welder in an automobile factory to join found objects into assemblages.  reclining figure exploits the play of the unexpected that characterized surrealist works by smith's contemporaries. .
b'this photograph, from a series that documents contemporary and historical homicide sites in new orleans, presents deborah lusters interpretation of the last view of the crime victim lying face up on the ground.  the title is the entry from the new orleans police blotter, but the photograph is lusters meditation on looking, seeing, and the power of images to haunt our imaginations.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013'.
b'montoyas rough-hewn landscapes recall the work of nineteenth-century photographers that presented uninhabited views of the u.s. western frontier.  in these photographs, montoya poses ethical questions about the nature of national borders.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
local calm is one of three etching that julie mehretu called collectively, heavy weather. this stretch of ocean between cape horn and antarctica, where the atlantic and pacific meet, has some of the worst sea weather in the world.
domingo ulloa painted this canvas after several visits to a bracero camp in holtville, california. his composition recalls photographs of concentration camp inmates, which ulloa--a world war ii veteran--was familiar with.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
the breathless, fleeing girl with clothing in flames epitomizes tannings surreal narratives. tanning had fled paris on the brink of war in 1939, and she returned in 1949 to a devastated city.
b'the delicate, skeletal figures in dorothy dehner\'s works reveal her curiosity about natural history and the underlying structures of life. in these two prints, patters of lines build vein-like webs within and between playfully dancing figures.
b'the delicate, skeletal figures in dorothy dehner\'s works reveal her curiosity about natural history and the underlying structures of life. in these two prints, patters of lines build vein-like webs within and between playfully dancing figures.
b'this watercolor refers to dehners life at bolton landing in upstate new york during the 1930s and 40s. although the title suggests that she represented specific people, the forms relate instead to the natural world and only occasionally reference human beings.
b'the paper plant where these men are laboring was the mainstay of glens falls, new york, where douglass crockwell had his studio. crockwell, like many artists on the public works of art project who anticipated the public exhibition of his painting, proudly depicted the chief industry of his town.
b'duane hanson is known for superrealistic sculptures that often cause viewers to pause with uncertainty about whether they are looking at a sculpture or a person. cast in fiberglass and resin from live models, then painted and clothed, hanson\'s life-size figures are presented as ordinary individuals engaged in everyday activities.
b'dwinell grants pioneering film contrathemis is a stop-motion animation made from more than 4,000 colored-pencil drawings and paper collages that were individually photographed and sequenced on 16mm film. geometric shapes swim across pulsating hues of rich color in a stylistic progression grant labeled organized field.
this serene painting speaks of the deep love hennings felt for taos, new mexico, where he was a leading member of the artists\' colony. in works like this, hennings created poetic visual connections between the people of taos and the stunning high desert where they lived.
eadweard muybridge went to great lengths to photograph the best possible views of the west. muybridge was determined to produce the most comprehensive photographs ever made of yosemite and the surrounding region.
earle richardson depicted his fellow african americans working barefooted in a southern cotton field, but the artist denied demeaning stereotypes to stress the dignity of his subjects.  they stand at the front of the painting, where they confront the viewer as equals who are ready for a better life.
b'many of hudnalls photographs focus on children and the elderly. a unique commonality exists between young and old, he observes, because there is always a continuity between the past and the future.
b'hudnall credits his father, an amateur photographer, and his grandmother, who kept a family album, with teaching him the importance of documenting people and the meaning of community. how we live from day to day, what we do on special holidays, family kinds of things and so forth.
b'hudnall used juxtaposition and subtle contrast to create meaning in his pictures. in street champion a boy brandishing boxing gloves, a girl holding a baseball bat, and their friends mug for the photographer against a backdrop of drying laundry and carpeting.
b'a girl stands on a promontory, her hair streaming in the wind. the path before her trails off, so she must either retrace her steps or try to find her way forward.
b'eastman johnson painted the lord is my shepherd only months after the emancipation proclamation of new year\'s day, 1863. the image of a humble black man reading from his bible was reassuring to white americans uncertain of what to expect from the freed slaves.
eddy mumma was named in honor of mary baker eddy, the founder of the church of christian science, whom his parents admired.  mummas paintings seem to redirect a character that was once larger-than-life; as mummas physical presence faded, his work came increasingly alive.
.
eddy mumma was named in honor of mary baker eddy, the founder of the church of christian science, whom his parents admired.  mummas paintings seem to redirect a character that was once larger-than-life; as mummas physical presence faded, his work came increasingly alive.
.
eddy mumma was named in honor of mary baker eddy, the founder of the church of christian science, whom his parents admired.  mummas paintings seem to redirect a character that was once larger-than-life; as mummas physical presence faded, his work came increasingly alive.
.
b'henry wadsworth longfellows the song of hiawatha inspired edmonia lewis to carve the old arrow maker, minnehaha of the dakota tribe plaits "mats of flags and rushes" while her father makes "arrow-heads of jasper."  in the story, hiawatha later marries minnehaha with the wish that ". . . old feuds might be forgotten/ and old wounds be healed forever."'.
b'in cape cod morning, a woman looks out a bay window, riveted by something beyond the pictorial space. she is framed by tall, dark shutters and the shaded faade of the oriel window.
b'hopper painted white river at sharon in september 1937, when he and his wife were visiting the farm of friends in vermont. but hopper believed that evidence of the human presence in the natural world reflected the reality of contemporary life.
b'edward and nancy reddin kienholz collected furniture, fixtures, wallpaper, and personal effects from the pedicord hotel in spokane, washington. sollie 17 offers a voyeuristic glimpse into a life of solitary despair.
b'laning corresponded with various people in bowling green about possible subject matter for his mural, and the local newspaper solicited ideas from its readers. veteran woodsmen though they were, the long hunters admitted they had never heard anything that remotely resembled it....
b'edward bannister was a leader in boston\'s african american culture in the middle of the nineteenth century. in 1870, the artist moved to rhode island, where he painted the pastures, marshes, and forests, seeking "the spiritual...in all created things.".
when edward ruscha first thought about being an artist, he felt that newspapers, magazines, or books were more interesting than what "some damn oil painter" was doing. in canada, u.s.a., mexico, the distant letters glow brightly in the night sky, like beacons sending messages out into the universe.
b'between 1900 and 1930, edward s. curtis traveled across the continent photographing more than seventy native american tribes. the photographs presented daily activities, customs, and religions of a people he called a vanishing race.
edwin lord weeks traveled to india in 1883, following many years of travel throughout north africa.  the lasting impact of his paintings was to bring alive a culture with which most of his american patrons were unfamiliar. .
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
over a period of five years elaine oneil and her daughter julia hess met each day in the living room to pose for a portrait. the images that resulted from their projectover 1,500 exposures in alldocument julias transition from a child of ten under her mothers protective arm to an independent young woman.
b'albas photographs challenge the straightforward link between how a person looks and who they are. here several partygoers wear masks depicting the face of larry levan (1954-1992), the legendary dj of the paradise garage in new york city.
american popular culture transformed the classical sculpting style that nadelman brought from europe.  it is as elegantly carved as an archaic figure of a temple dancer but still conveys the impudent energy of the can-can.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
b'in the late 1980s, ellen brooks was drawn to images of what she called palatable nature  objects and landscapes that conform to culturally defined ideals of natural beauty. for course i, brooks painted over an image of a manicured golf course, and then re-photographed it through a dense mesh screen that recalls the halftone screen used to print photographic reproductions.
a lush jungle of flowering tobacco plants provides the backdrop for a family of field hands who walk in frieze-like procession along a rough dirt path. field workers speaks eloquently to the condition of a particular family's life -- and by extension to the lives of all who toil on the land.
 bischoff taught as he painted, avoiding the party line of powerful critics and allowing his students the freedom to paint from life.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006' b'two bathers is a classical scene filtered through the abstract expressionism that dominated american art after world war ii. bischoff covered the canvas with hot reds, greens, and cool blues, and his liquid paint gives the women the same substance as the landscape.
b'leutze\'s mural study for the capitol in washington celebrated  the idea of manifest destiny just when the civil war threatened the republic. the surging crowd of figures records the births, deaths, and battles fought as european americans settled the continent to the edge of the pacific.
martinez defined social struggle in christian terms by combining elements of spirituality and mestizaje, the mixed racial heritage of mexicans and their chicano descendants. b'martinez created this altar for the 1968 catholic mass held in delano california, where csar chvez broke the twenty-five-day fast he had undertaken to protest unfair employment practices and unsuitable work conditions for migrant laborers.
he called the individual pieces his pretties, but collectively they comprised the healing machine. blagdon worked on his healing machine for more than three decades, tending, tinkering with, and reorganizing its components every day and, in his own words, according to the phases of the moon.
in the 1980s, snchez turned to the urban landscape of new york, where commercial establishments like bodegas (corner stores) evoked places and people from the caribbean. la rumba supermarket is named after a signature cuban rhythm that became internationalized after the 1930s.
b'chagoyas lithograph resembles a pre-columbian maya codex, an accordion-like book printed on amate paper and traditionally read from right to left. by juxtaposing historical images and comic-book figures, chagoya conceives of an ironic history in which non-european peoples survive turbulent events of the past and present.
b'the clemente family is a study of the complex dynamics among parents and siblings. fischl depicted his friend, the painter francesco clemente, veiled in shadow to cast him as someone who, fischl explained, "stands outside his own reality looking in.".
b'in ten breaths: tumbling woman ii, eric fischl used a single figure to call attention to the human dimension of the september 11th attack on the world trade center. fischl intended tumbling woman to be "a healing object" for mourners of this unprecedented loss.
yet artist erle loran imbued this painting of his home state with hope. b'chilly and brown, this view of minnesota farms seems at first glance as bleak and unpromising as the great depression that gripped the nation.
but vicente felt strongly connected to the painterly tradition of goya, velzquez, and other masters of his birth country. a sense of being part of arts long tradition may seem odd for an artist who spent more than half of his career eliminating imagery from his canvases.
b'chagoyas lithograph resembles a pre-columbian maya codex, an accordion-like book printed on amate paper and traditionally read from right to left. his contemporary rendition blends references to several apocalyptic moments  the conquest of the americas, transatlantic slavery, deadly tsunamis, and the disastrous economic downturn of 2008.
the core of the rufus corporations expedition to unravel utopian promise would become this digital cinema installation whiteonwhite:algorithmicnoic. further provoking cinematic form, the films presentation is edited in real time by a custom-programmed computer that sussman has labeled the serendipity machine.
b'red stripe with green background plays with perception. a field of slightly variant shades of green is divided by red, yellow, and blue horizontal stripes.
ferdinand pettrich created this work when political power in the united states was being consolidated around the federal government. citizen militias, organized at moments of crisis and quickly disbanded, represented the true nature of a democracy.
b'the weight of light draws from the colors and iconography of the afro-brazilian religion candombl, according to which oshal, an emissary of god, climbed down a chain to create the earth. born out of the transatlantic slave trade, this spiritual tradition combines african beliefs with catholic practices.
b'a rural couple listens skeptically to a representative of the building association, identified by the paper in his coat pocket. francis william edmonds\'s comic genre scenes captured the rough-and-tumble of america\'s frontiers.
as a self-sufficient landholder and businessman, "squire jack" embodied an independent and enduring spirit that, by the 1850s, had become an american ideal, celebrated by painters and writers alike. b'jack porter, a veteran of the war of 1812 who made a handsome living from pennsylvania\'s coal mines, is surrounded by handmade objects, including a corncob pipe, a roughly-hewn wooden bench, and his wife\'s knitting.
b'frank espada probably focused his lens on abandoned buildings because they were directly related to his activism. like the south bronx, east new york was peppered with abandoned buildings, many vacated due to both accidental fires and arson.
b'an armchair, typically an object of domestic comfort and warmth, is cast off onto a cold and barren lot. frank espada\'s poetic photograph sheds light on a difficult chapter in new york history.
b'in the 1970s, frank espada began the puerto rican diaspora, an ambitious exhibition and book project that documented puerto rican communities across the united states. espada followed the trail of migrants who had settled in cities from the mid-west and east coast to hawaii.
b'frank jones said he started seeing haints (haunts or ghosts) and devils when he was a boy of about nine, and he drew his first interpretations of them around that time.  his frequent use of clocks references an early prison job as a courthouse clock winder as well as the metaphor of doing time.'.
romero memorializes rubn salazar, a los angeles times journalist and key chronicler of the chicano civil rights movement. romero combined references to this tragic day with a vision of the future when salazar is the subject of a film announced on a theater marquee.
b'the centralized green, black, and red strokes set against a blue field in blueberry eyes project the aspect of a figure against a background space. the energy here is electric, even joyous.
b'merce c is franz kline\'s tribute to the dancer-choreographer merce cunningham, with whom he taught at the experimental art school black mountain college in north carolina in the 1950s. the spatters and drips of black paint reveal that merce c was painted on the horizontal, resting on what is now the canvas\'s right edge.
as a young artist based in new york, rodrguez was drawn to piet mondrians works on view at the museum of modern art and the hard-edge painting of frank stella and other contemporary americans. these antecedents inspired rodrguezs own geometric abstractions, which increasingly began to refer to aspects of his own cultural background.
b'the statue of liberty was a gift from france in honor of the friendship forged between these countries during the american revolution. bartholdi brought this small-scale version of his monumental sculpture to washington, where it was on view in the capitol rotunda from 1884 until 1887.
b'frederic church was an ambitious painter and enthusiastic amateur scientist. he had read darwin\'s books and alexander von humboldt\'s descriptions of cotopaxi,"the most dreadful volcano...its explosions most frequent and disastrous."the fabled ecuadorian mountain provided both a poetic symbol of god\'s creation and an exciting window into the planet\'s natural history.
by 1907 remington had made the transition from popular illustrator to respected artist, and this was the first painting of his to be acquired by an american museum. fired on captures the fear and adrenaline of an ambush in the west.
b'eversley speaks of energy, space, time, and matter  concepts familiar to physicists and mathematicians and to an electrical engineer who gave up a career in the space program to make sculpture. the disc form of this untitled work is the result of the centrifugal process.
b'virginia artist frederick kahler spends months, sometimes years on his detailed ink and watercolor compositions, which evoke ancient landscapes, metaphysical themes, and myths. drawing is both meditative and consuming for kahler, who works in secluded silence and never retouches any mark he makes.
he added appeal to this quiet town scene by using brilliant reds, greens, and blues like those he might have used in his advertising designs. unable to find much market for his fine artworks in the kansas city area during the great depression, artist stockwell made his living as a commercial artist working for a chain of stores.
garry winogrand, 1974the street was garry winogrands playground as he recorded fleeting moments from the busy world around him. i photograph the world to see what the world looks like photographed.
in girl holding popsicle, a young girl twists shyly as she poses before a graffiti-inscribed brick wall. cohen does not hesitate to get assertively close to the strangers he meets in his hometown of wilkes-barre, pennsylvania.
b'in 1906, with thirty dollars in his pocket and no knowledge of english, lachaise left france for boston in pursuit of the woman who would later become his wife. head of a woman is a stylized portrait of isabel, his wife and muse.
b'the museum of modern art included black grey beat in a groundbreaking 1965 exhibition the responsive eye.  the curator, william seitz, placed davis among the color imagists [who] are poetic, even romantic in approach," freely choosing bold colors for their "billboards."gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'\ndavis helped pioneer expansive, environmental works, insisting, my paintings should engulf.  although he disliked being linked to op art, many of his large paintings vibrate with a retinal pushpull.gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'davis placed colors without a preconceived plan: "my whole approach is intuitive.  sometimes i simply use the color i have the most of and worry about getting out of trouble later."gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'in this early painting, with a simple matrix and only five colors, davis allows the raw canvas to peek through between washes of magna paint.  gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'the radiant hue of its namesake fruit manages to unify the complexity of color in this work.  davis later said about this mesmerizing canvas: "i was doing big, big work...i equated that with quality, bigness with quality."gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
in red baron he juxtaposed stripes of different widths and sets of colors.  he identified such visual conflict as "inherent in my personality...a schizoid quality. ...i\'ve been hung up on paintings that are split down the middle."gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'davis began his career making gestural, abstract drawings in black ink, but the various grays in drawings such as saber dance indicate an incipient interest in color.  davis made the drawings without a subject in mind and gave them titles after he completed them.graphic masters ii: highlights from the smithsonian american art museum, 2009'.
b'davis achieved a machine-like hard edge with masking tape.  gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'at first glance, the intense primary colors of this canvas may simply suggest a symbol, such as a flag.  all of the information is not immediately available.gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'davis described his modular works as architectural because they incorporated the wall on which they were hung.  these works, known as "planks," may have influenced minimalist sculptor donald judd, who reviewed and admired them in davis\'s 1963 new york gallery show.gene davis: hot beat, 2016'.
b'each day before starting to paint, ault made his studio as neat as possible.  in this watercolor made soon after he moved to woodstock, new york, ault made order twice: once in the actual studio, and again in the painting recording it.to make a world: george ault and 1940s america, 2011'.
b'beginning in 1830, artist-explorer george catlin made five trips to the western frontier.  he was inspired to go west by the idea that americas native people and its great herds of buffalo would soon melt away in the face of advancing civilization.the great american hall of wonders, 2011'.
 lewis and clark spent the winter of 1804--05 with them, and mandan chief sheheke visited washington, d.c., in 1806.' b'the mandan village near fort clark in present-day north dakota was a hub of commerce where agricultural products and manufactured goods obtained from whites were traded for furs, horses, and other commodities with plains tribes.
b'like the cherokee, creek, chickasaw, and seminole, the choctaw were farmers, plantation owners, and educated professionals. snapping turtle, also known as peter pitchlynn, was a graduate of the university of nashville and george catlins source for much curious and valuable information, of the history and traditions of his tribe.
b'catlin mistranslated ah-jon-jon, whose name means the light, as pigeon\'s egg head. the light was an assiniboine leader who was invited in 1831 to represent his tribe in washington.
b'in 1933, george grosz immigrated to the united states to escape persecution from the growing nazi presence in his native germany.  a hunger fantasy, which shows a drooling creature greedily clutching wine, bread, and a sagging piece of meat, revisits his early condemnation of gluttony and self-indulgence.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
the sharp-edged rectangle on the right side of the face, and a much smaller one above, suggest bayonets. bits of words cut off by these elements appear to spell "boulangerie d\'alenon," perhaps a favorite bakery from morris\'s paris days.morris made several abstract paintings about the war in europe.
b'as foretold in the book of revelation, saint michael the archangel will fight an apocalyptic battle against satan, who will wage this last war in the form of a dragon. in this carving the artist depicts an ominous, sharp-clawed devil as part snake, part insect."and there was war in heaven, michael and his angels waging war with the dragon.
george segal found the themes for his plaster-cast figures in accidental glimpses of other people's lives. his technique demanded that his sitters keep their eyes shut, and the resulting faces remain impassive while the body alone communicates.
like his friends paul cadmus and bernard perlin, tooker painted in egg tempura.  the nocturnal scene is gentle, the serene enclosure a refuge from the night.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
events tied to personal experience and family histories are often at the center of folk expressions.  yet aspects like the electrical wiring that once animated the rooftop men and lit the interior, underscore his delight in entertaining viewers.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
george widener is an ace with numbers. 28-28 plays with a connection he had at the time between the numbers of his own birthdate (2-8) and this then-girlfriend's: 4-28, or (2 x 2)-28. widener explains that he sees the numbers in his mind and enjoys envisioning all of their possible relationships.
in 1959, georgia o'keeffe embarked on a whirlwind world tour for three months. visiting india, east asia, southeast asia, the middle east, and rome, her main source of transportation was, for the first time, commercial airlines.
b'with exhilarating speed yachts sweep across the choppy waters of long island sound, the water foaming white against their hulls.  in the middle ground, a pair of larger craft catch the wind in bellying spinnakers as they sail in nearly the opposite direction.'.
in response, kim, who is korean american, paintedsixteen panels of the pinkish flesh tones and ligon, who is african american, paintedsixteen panels using various black pigments.  arranged in an austere grid, black &amp; white elegantly underscores racial privilege.'.
parks completed some three hundred assignments for life magazine over a twenty-year period. he shot fashion spreads in paris and portraits of luminaries alexander calder, aaron copland, malcolm x, and others.
after the death of his mother, sixteen-year-old parks close-knit family split up and he went to live with a sister in st. evicted by his brother-in-law, he took to the streets.
b'frank o\'hara and grace hartigan were close friends in new york\'s postwar art scene. like o\'hara, hartigan looked for everything that was "vulgar and vital" in american culture to fuel her abstract paintings.
b'engine parts, a headlight, gas tank, and handle bars are intermingled with a zippered motorcycle jacket sleeve, a rider, womens legs, and other less identifiable forms in modern cycle.  modern masters: midcentury abstraction from the smithsonian american art museum, 2008'.
clarence and grace woolsey started their yard environment of bottlecap sculptures in the winter of 1961. in the mid-1970s, they began charging curiosity-seekers to view "the world's largest pioneer caparena.".
b'in chamber, the rough texture of the woodcut surface and outlines contribute to the works expressionistic qualities, while the rich colors lend a decorative balance to the composition.  based on one of amenoffs paintings but considerably altered in scale and color, the print is transformed into an independent work of art.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'gillespie painted green landscape shortly after his return to the united states from italy in 1970, where he had begun crafting small, visionary landscapes that blended elements of flemish realism and surrealism with collaged views of the contemporary world.  the cabbages, pecking chickens, and fall color in his landscape are true to nature, but the image seems invented and out of time.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'the now-defunct conceptual art group asco coined the phrase no movie to refer to their fabricated film stills of nonexistent films. one such production,  la mode, features a glamorous patssi valdez sandwiched between two men (gronk and harry gamboa) as if to suggest a love-triangle movie plot.
by the 1920s, pne du bois was well known for ironic paintings of what he called the symbols of sophistication. pne du bois made his artistic debut at the 1905 paris salon but returned to new york in 1906.
saen studied with matisse in paris and was among the first to bring modern art into philadelphia's conservative culture. he created the thundershower from a mix of european modernism and native american decorative patterns.
in woodruffs afro emblems, objects hovering in a field of blue speak of ancient times and people. their forms  some calligraphic, others geometric  are loosely arranged into vertical columns, stacked as though on totem poles that record the history and oral traditions of a culture.
b'with every movement of the observer\'s body, the spatial impression of two cubes on a striped surface changes. hans breder\'s use of minimal geometric forms and mirrored, reflective surfaces unites virtual and real space and, in his words, "breaks down the barrier between the real and the illusory.".
b'hofmann painted the lyrical semi-abstraction called afterglow during the summer of 1938 in provincetown, massachusetts. buildings and trees emerge from a welter of seemingly random lines and abbreviated marks to resolve into a high-keyed landscape.
b'harold edgerton was a pioneer in photographing fast-paced events invisible to the naked eye. using strobe lights that could flash up to 120 times a second, he tracked the motion of all kinds of human and mechanical operations, such as the movement of air through the blades of a fan.
in 1949, tovish created a series of figural sculptures that captured the horror he felt as a soldier exposed to nazi concentration camps at the end of world war ii. in memoriam, created decades later in which faces gaze out from within split cannonballs, continues his theme of entrapment.  it honors both those who lost their lives during the war and living individuals imprisoned by mental, emotional, and societal circumstances.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
b'harry bertoia\'s sculptural installation reflects the optimism of the 1950s, when the economy boomed and broadcast television was transforming american culture.  bertoia\'s vision of global communications is a reality today, as satellites constantly receive and transmit signals for broadcast, cell phone, and computer communications. '.
b'the now-defunct conceptual art group asco coined the phrase no movie to refer to their fabricated film stills of nonexistent films. one such production,  la mode, features a glamorous patssi valdez sandwiched between two men (gronk and harry gamboa) as if to suggest a love-triangle movie plot.
workers scurry like busy ants to complete the university of pittsburgh's lofty cathedral of learning.  behind the cathedral of learning stand the gleaming white columns of the mellon institute building, which was also under construction.
workers scurry like busy ants to complete the university of pittsburgh's lofty cathedral of learning.  behind the cathedral of learning stand the gleaming white columns of the mellon institute building, which was also under construction.
b'hawkins boldens sculptures make a bold statement about confronting challenge with creativity. human in scale, dotted with multiple eyes, raw, rusted, tattered, and soiled, they are both arresting and discomfiting.\nbolden was blinded in a childhood accident.
b'the warm brown and sandy yellow tones of desert pass evoke a sense of the southwest that frankenthaler experienced on her first trip to arizona.  desert pass can be understood as a mindscape, an image in which a creative individual assimilates the world around her.\nmodern masters: midcentury abstraction from the smithsonian american art museum, 2008\n'.
b'caught before they run off into the streets, three masked youngsters pause on their front stoop. helen levitt, who found poetry in the uninhibited gestures of children, used a right-angle viewfinder to capture boys and girls roaming freely and playing with found objects.
gentry said he painted people ive met throughout most of the world  american, african americanwho are my friends. b'our city is a field of barely controlled skeins of color that swirl around a large central head.
herbert singleton was born in the new orleans neighborhood of algiers. his art drew heavily on life in a corrosive inner-city neighborhood and addressed, comprehensively, both themes of racial injustice and the rich african-american cultural traditions of his region.
b'herman maril opened a window onto the history of his native city in this view of baltimore harbor. maril was a modernist painter who simplified the forms in the painting to make "the abstract structure . . . dominant," yet he retained enough details to situate the scene in a past era.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
hiram powers (1805-73) was among the first american sculptors to establish an international reputation, rising to fame in the late 1840s with his greek slave, a life-size marble sculpture of a chained, nude woman. although he always intended to return to the united states, powers remained abroad until his death and became an unofficial ambassador for american culture.
greek slave became the most famous sculpture of the nineteenth century and propelled the artist, hiram powers (1805-73), to international stardom.  much to powers' dismay, the sculpture became so popular that countless unauthorized imitations of greek slave were also made.
powers portrayed president jackson in a greek toga, but showed his rugged features faithfully, reflecting both the fashion for classical sculpture and the american taste for an authentic likeness.  the very next year, the president laid the cornerstone for the patent office building in which this sculpture appears today.
b'the iron-ore bed in craig harbor near port henry, new york, was one of the richest veins in the northeast. nearby were the blast furnaces of the bay state iron mine company, which supplied the steel for america\'s railroads.
the side panels---showing a county fair, a schoolroom, a barnyard scene, and the parlor of a modest home---are drawn from the fabric of american life. for tribute to the american working people, sharrer, who was employed as a shipyard welder during world war ii, employed the polyptych format of medieval italian religious paintings in which a central panel features a saint and smaller flanking panels depict events in his life.
b'samuel f. b. morse began his career as an artist and produced a series of highly acclaimed paintings, including portraits of the most celebrated people of the day.  because of a lack of steady patronage, morse ultimately abandoned art and devoted his time to developing the electromagnetic telegraph he unveiled in 1837.\nthe great american hall of wonders, 2011'.
howard newman casts elements from machines and assembles them into interlocking geometric shapes that resemble human figures.  the mechanomorphic figure of half woman, quarter bird fuses images from nature and industry, offering a cautionary note that speaks to the potential for technological entrapment.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
hugo robuss sculpture captures the age-old theme of mother and child. the stylized design and polished surface of one and another reflect his early training as a jeweler before he turned to painting and subsequently to sculpture.
sketch for machine composition #2 was inspired by the view from the artists studio window. i used to look in at a power house on 16th street where i was living, to get the feeling of power house; and then made my own.
the subtle variations in color come from alloys (phosphor bronze, silicon bronze, nickel-silver) and other metals that lassaw treated with chemicals. b'banquet is built up of thousands of droplets of metal melted over thin rods that are joined by crumpled sheets of copper.
b'svetlana and igor kopystiansky titled this work after wassily kandinskys theater production of the same name, linking it to a larger history of experimental art forms and invoking the significance of musical performance to the visual arts. here, yellow sound displays found film of a stylus silently playing a record on a turntable.
b'a palpable sense of longing animates garcas photograph of two rustic chairs common in the dominican republic that are posed like star-crossed lovers on the beach.  this romantic imagery becomes a vehicle to consider the ties that bind immigrants to their native countries.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'the solemn cadence of architectural variation comes from the relationships among blocks of muted color. bolotowsky had the idea, he said, of creating a counterpoint of colors, that would work together like one of johann sebastian bachs contrapuntal motifs.
b'brilliant reds, blues, and greens bring a strange luminous intensity to this otherwise ordinary new york barbershop. for bolotowsky, when folk from around the world gathered in a new york barbershop they embodied the american scene.
he stretched canvas over the wheels rims and called these round paintings tondos, as a reference to the circular paintings of raphael. b'at the university of wyoming, where he taught after serving in the army air corps during world war ii, bolotowsky met a farmer who gave him several wagon wheels.
irving penn was one of the most important and influential photographers of the twentieth century. throughout his career penn also worked on a series of photographs of discarded objects: things that had been lost, neglected, or misused.
the artist discovers beauty and meaning in whatever environment he is cast by chance, soyer wrote in 1947. in the waitress, soyer captures a waitress cleaning the table of a man dining alone.
b'bishops impeccable draftsmanship brought her recognition in the 1930s as one of the outstanding urban realists of the fourteenth street school, a group named for the area where bishop, reginald marsh, raphael soyer, and several other artist friends portrayed the local scene.  artists table offers an intimate glimpse of bishops studio; the casual disarray of the painting table and partly opened drawer reveal the private space in which the artist worked.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
bishop dedicated herself to this kind of preparatory work to such an extent that she sometimes completed only four paintings per year. b'bishop moved to her studio in union square in new york city in 1934 and spent much of her time sketching people in the area engaged in their everyday activities.
believing that sculpture should be "an equivalent for natural forms and forces," isamu noguchi explored the sun's vital power in this massive marble. born in california to an american mother and japanese father, noguchi spent most of his childhood in japan before continuing his education in the american midwest, new york city, and paris.
b'ivan albright\'s obsessively detailed painting style put on canvas the crushing impact of drudgery and advancing age.  the burden of empathy for this hard life, made yet harder by the depression, is almost unbearable.'.
"everything i see is from the sun," murray said in 1986, recalling the experience that led to his art making. he described a vision of golden light and an eagle flying past the sun, as well as seeing deceased family members.
murray described seeing a golden light and an eagle flying past the sun as well as deceased family members. "everything i see is from the sun," murray said in 1986, recalling a vision that led to his art making.
b'fosdick made this relief to appeal to wealthy industrialists who favored richly designed interiors  and uplifting art. she could be a figure from the romantic past and an emblem of the "new woman" in the modern world.
b'inauguration portrays the solemnity of the quadrennial ceremony in which the chief justice of the supreme court administers the oath of office to the nations president-elect. levine identified the presidential figure as a combination of woodrow wilson, harry truman, and dwight eisenhower, suggesting the continuity of the american democratic process.
jacob getlar smith found men hired by the governments new work relief program, the civil works administration, to shovel snow from the streets and park paths of new york. many artists went out into the cold to find subjects after the pwap began in december 1933.
b'in new orleans, lawrence experienced firsthand the daily reality of jim crow segregation, where legislation required that he ride in the back of city buses and live in a racially segregated neighborhood. his anger is apparent in bar and grill, which shows the interior of a caf with a wall that divides the space into two distinct realms  one occupied by whites, the other by blacks.
walking the streets of jamaica, lawrence said, i was aware of the warmth, rapport, and the exciting movement and counter movements of its many inhabitants. b'community celebrates the multivalent character of american life.
b'my work is abstract in the sense of having been designed and composed, but it is not abstract in the sense of having no human contact.  communicating his idea forcefully, lawrence depicted tubman schematically; her hands are large as they urge fleeing families to move forward.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'idaho native james castle recorded personal views of his home ground between roughly 1910 and 1970. in these drawings, castle depicts some of his paper people situated within otherwise quiet interiors.
more privileged citizenslike those seen in the background of this paintingwere morbidly fascinated and outraged by the victimization of the savoyard beggars. b'james freeman\'s image of an exhausted, threadbare boy dozing on a london curb typifies the "fancy pictures" of sweet, colorful street children popular on both sides of the atlantic.
b'the throne of the third heaven of the nations\' millennium general assembly is a complex work of art created by james hampton over a period of fourteen years. hampton made the array based on several religious visions that prompted him to prepare for christ\'s return to earth.
in underground railroad newell captures a moment of democratic idealism important in dolgeville history. his painting depicts an abolitionist farmer hurrying escaped slaves out of sight as dawn breaks at the brockett farm, one of two underground railroad stations near the dolgeville village limits.
the softly brushed lines and gently calibrated color of still life with peonies reflects porters thinking about the confluence of the personal and the contextual in the practice of art. the simple screen and striped wallpaper serve as counterpoints to the energy of the peonies petals.
james rosenquist began his career designing eye-catching graphics for billboards and road signs. in his prints, rosenquist continued to use an airbrush, a tool of the advertising trade, to give his forms a seamless look.
industrial cottage reflects the patchwork of neighborhoods and industrial parks along florida's gulf coast where rosenquist settled in 1976. rosenquist divided the canvas into three zones, populating each with large forms that reflected his years as a billboard painter.
black and white tipped flower captures the tornadoes, black earth, and tenacious animal energy of the piney woods of southeast texas. surls grew up in a house that his father built, and his art comes out of a lifetime of working with hand tools and "making do.".
me, the axe, and the wand embodies the "demons lurking in the wood pile" that surls credits for his art. a house where a head ought to be evokes the home surls grew up in, learning from his father to use tools and to improvise.
the sitter in evening attire is dressed in a beaded evening gown, an elegant, full hat, and a foxtail wrap; she holds a spray of flowers. vanderzee is best known for the studio portraits he made in harlem after world war i. his sensitivity and the pride he felt from living and working within the community are clear in elegant and graceful images that challenged prevailing stereotypes.
b'jan groover trained as a painter and initially used the camera as a means to make conceptual art, but later became devoted to the idea of pure, straight photography. in this untitled photograph, groover shifted her camera to capture slight variations in the arrangement of shadows cast by the citys architecture.
b'in girl holding popsicle, a young girl twists shyly as she poses before a graffiti-inscribed brick wall. cohen does not hesitate to get assertively close to the strangers he meets in his hometown of wilkes-barre, pennsylvania.
b'echelman\'s immersive artwork examines the complex interconnections between human beings and our physical world.  echelman\'s knotted meditation contrasts the forces we can understand and control with those we cannot, and the concerns of our daily existence with larger cycles of time.'.
b'jasper johns transformed symbols and objects into subjects for art. in gray alphabets, johns filled a grid with a continuous, repeating sequence of the letters a through z.
cane, by jean toomer, is a book of prose and poetry and a masterpiece of african-american literature by one of the leading writers of the harlem renaissance. leon litwack, a historian of the black experience in america, writes: even in the absence of narrative continuity, cane has a cohesion, an aesthetic unity, a thread that binds the various vignettes and stories together.
b'since 1970 jennifer bartlett has reworked this iconic emblem of a "house"--a triangle atop a rectangle--to explore how rules and systems govern our lives. close inspection reveals that each dot is unique in shape and character, further destabilizing the picture\'s tight, organizing grid.
b'jenny holzer designed for saam in response to the high ceilings and open, airy space of the lincoln gallery. the sculpture features texts from four of the artist\'s previous series-- truisms, living (selections), survival (selections), and arno.
b'the videogame flower places participants in the role of the wind as they traverse a vast landscape and touch their surroundings. creators jenova chen and kellee santiago render an unexplored land for the player to feel and transform.
b'me, we recasts a ubiquitous modern-day beast of burden, the shipping pallet, using materials associated with classical commemorative sculpture.  amados marble and granite diptych honors workers whose anonymous labor supports our lives.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'the saw and the scroll is a tour through the bible written on an old hand saw, canvas, and discarded wood. howard reveals his passion for the bible by enthusiastically listing books, chapters, and verses.
mis hermanos was inspired by a snapshot of a weekend family get-together where siblings gather for a photo, their eyes perhaps focused on multiple cameras.  trevios photorealist paintings monumentalize everyday people and places not traditionally viewed as icons of the united states.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013.
moroles began weaving granite in the late 1980s. b'moroless granite sculptures originate deep in the earth, born of fire and the volcanic action that created the very crust of the planet.
b'images of the classical venus de milo recur frequently in jim dines art.  the artist may be alluding to the various meanings of venus by repeating the image, yet making each representation distinctive.multiplicity, 2011'.
the valiant red car was a celebration of her red valiant. between 1959 and 1962, he memorialized the tragedy in a series of drawings, paintings, and prints and in a happening called the car crash for which the valiant red car served as a backdrop.
b'jimmy ernst used complex interlocking lines and geometric shapes to manipulate pictorial space.  rather than the bold, gestural brushstrokes of his abstract expressionist contemporaries, ernst preferred delicate lines and precise marks that captured the energy of subconscious creation.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'marlin is one of the "very violent and angry paintings" that mitchell created around 1960 after her move to france. mitchell flatly stated that "the freedom in my work is quite controlled.
b'in her managing eden series, joann brennan grappled with the question of how we sustain wildness in a human world. canada geese have become a threat to public health in suburban areas where green spaces and artificial waterways offer ideal habitats.
b'in back yard, diamond bar, ca, brick walls converge at sharp angles to clearly define a residential lot cut out of a hillside. just twenty-four years before deal arrived, the land that is now the city of diamond bar was untouched pasture for grazing cattle.
 although an important group of murals resulted, the forty-eight states competition did not stimulate widespread public demand for a permanent fine arts program.\nspecial delivery: murals for the new deal era, 1988' they selected a post office in each state to receive a mural, and launched a nationwide competition.
louis building as evening falls and street lights begin to glow. b'these workers are demolishing a st.
b'the tangle of brushstrokes in living your life in a goldfish bowl brings to mind the clotted, suffocating density of swamps in john alexander\'s native texas. the goldfish bowl represents life\'s generalized paranoia and viciousness, as well as the specific pressures of his career.
b'black dice is based on a still photograph derived from an english gangster film of that name. the photograph represents a split second from a longer, continuous narrative.
in teaching a plant the alphabet, the artist patiently gives an elementary lesson in the english alphabet to a potted banana plant. b'one of john baldessaris primary interests as a conceptual artist is to explore how images acquire meaning, and therefore to probe the boundaries of how we define art.
b'in this single-channel video, john baldessari examines the chronological relationship between still images and motion pictures. the artist constructs a purposefully crude moving image from still pictures of himself walking toward the camera, then running past it.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. b'john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
b'this panoramic view of lower manhattan seen from brooklyn was an absorbing artistic project for artist john cunning.  the artist needed many days to study the scene, capturing winter light effects on the many structures he described in detail.'.
b'during the summer of 1936, walker evans joined writer james agee in rural alabama to work on a magazine assignment on cotton farming. it contains some of the most iconic and contentious photographs to document the great depression.kitchen wall, alabama farmstead reads like a modern novel.
b'a pioneer of american abstraction, ferren created this composition during a seven-year sojourn in paris. he then carved into it to create a bas-relief sculpture of modeled and curved planes.
b'in 1814 artist and ornithologist john james audubon first saw the elusive gigantic eagle he called "the bird of washington" flying along the bluffs of the upper mississippi river, near the great lakes. larger than any known species of eagle found anywhere in the world, the eagle audubon shot measured almost four feet tall, with a wingspan over ten feet wide.
b'cornelius vanderbilt ii hired john la farge and augustus saint-gaudens to create the interiors for his manhattan mansion. this relief of apollo appeared in the ensemble, and was based on byzantine and pompeian art reproduced in books owned by la farge.
b'la farge\'s stained-glass windows reflect the gilded age fascination with medieval art and craftsmanship. the industrial revolution had made inexpensive, mass-produced glass available to anyone, but art glass remained an emblem of wealth and good taste.
b'la farge\'s stained-glass windows reflect the gilded age fascination with medieval art and craftsmanship. the industrial revolution had made inexpensive, mass-produced glass available to anyone, but art glass remained an emblem of wealth and good taste.
b'john mclaughlin worked as a sailor and military intelligence officer and was a student of japanese and chinese art before he began painting at age forty-eight. working in his garage in dana point, california, he explored the possibilities for meditation he associated with japanese art.
black knife, also known as baishan, or by his spanish name, cuchillo negro, was a celebrated apache chief. in late october 1846 kearny's troops encountered black knife, here seen scouting the position of the army troops, near what is now the tonto national forest in arizona.
melodramatic tales of scalping were popular in europe and the united states throughout the nineteenth century. john mix stanleys operatic scene shows a villain wielding a war club over a desperate woman's head.
john pfahls photographs embody the conflict between progress and preservation.  goodyear #5 complicates popular notions of power plants by revealing an uncommonly beautiful view of a sometimes controversial structure.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
the french word chandelle means "candle," and this sculpture, although not strictly representational, evokes the form of a flickering flame. the title of the work may also reflect john safer's knowledge of aviation, gained from his experience in the us air force.
scott learned well the lessons of his blues and jazz sources. the brightly colored surfaces of thornbush blues totem not only define the relationship among the cut and bent metal parts; the sequencing of color also echoes the way musicians modulate tempo and pace.
according to sargent, twenty-six-year old elizabeth chanler had "the face of the madonna and the eyes of a child." perhaps the artist wished to show elizabeth as a woman who, despite early hardships, was neither maiden nor matron.
hooper was the son of robert king hooper, who owned a fishing fleet that worked out of marblehead, massachusetts.  robert had graduated from harvard in 1763, and copley\'s painting shows him settling into the comfortable life of a merchant prince. '.
b'when curry was asked to create a monumental image for a war-bond poster during world war ii, he depicted a noble american farmer, flanked by two carefree children, standing tall in his kansas wheat field.  this watercolor is a study for the painting, which was then reproduced as a poster captioned our good earth  keep it ours.graphic masters ii: highlights from the smithsonian american art museum, 2009'.
b'the intense stare and looming presence of this self-portrait reveal currys confidence at a turning point in his career. in 1927 he had returned to the united states after studying drawing in paris, and a year later his paintings had attained national acclaim.
b'this girl\'s flushed cheeks, bright eyes, and graceful gestures hint at a vibrant personality.  many moravians settled in georgia, pennsylvania, and north carolina, seeking the religious freedom that led many people of various faiths to migrate to america.'.
jon serls paintings magnificently fuse the vivid life of his peripatetic, vaudeville upbringing with mature musings on survival, human relations, gender identity, morality, and his own artistic life in the company of chickens and chihuahuas.  he soon turned to portrayals of human interaction marked by saturated color and liquid-limbed, dream-like figures.
b'jonathan borofsky\'s monumental silhouette of a man carrying a briefcase portrays an urban everyman.  the number on the figure\'s leg, "3277542," reflects the artist\'s habit of "signing" his pieces with a number from a continuous sequence.'.
in the early 1970s, soto snchez saw francisco ollers el velorio (1893), an iconic puerto rican painting that depicts a baquin, a folk catholic custom that commemorates the death of a child. soto snchez formed part of a community of diasporic puerto rican artists who, unlike many cultural elites on the island, affirmed the importance of afro-puerto rican culture.
b'the halo of five stars around the head of san juan nepomuceno, the patron saint of confessors, spells out tacui, latin for "i did not speak." this painting reminded priests of their obligation to remain silent regarding what they heard from those they absolved.
b'since 1970 jennifer bartlett has reworked this iconic emblem of a "house"--a triangle atop a rectangle--to explore how rules and systems govern our lives. close inspection reveals that each dot is unique in shape and character, further destabilizing the picture\'s tight, organizing grid.
b'a mathematical formula seems an odd starting point for an artist, but this is the way josef albers began more than one thousand panels he called homage to the square.  as a result, the central yellow square seems either to recede or project forward, depending on the viewing distance.modern masters: midcentury abstraction from the smithsonian american art museum, 2008'.
b'the playful asymmetry of on tideland results from alberss use of only three colors: gray, ochre, and a rosy orange. the large gray background has a blue cast when adjacent to ochre and seems to recede in space, but that same gray in the smaller vertical forms seems to take on a different hue when placed beside the pinkish orange.
they say the owl is a bakers daughter is one of ophelias lines in shakespeares hamlet. it refers to a popular legend in which christ transforms a bakers daughter into an owl after she has denied him a piece of bread.
despite its apparent spontaneity, penn station at war time is a sophisticated painting. penn station at war time is an amusing image of travelers struggling to make their way through a dense mass of people as they rush to catch their trains.
sharp arranged three figures to suggest different steps in a ceremonial fire.  but there is no trace of the modern world in this image, and this painting is a ritual itself, a romantic effort to call forth a vanished civilization.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
stella believed that every day should "begin and end [with] the painting of a flower." stella had moments of homesickness, when images of his homeland came to him as clearly as when he first arrived in america in 1896.
b'josephine joy grew up on an illinois farm, where she loved to sketch birds, trees, and flowers. joy lived in california then, and the wpa\'s california art project afforded her the opportunity to work gainfully as an artist.
b'joshua johnson, a self-trained artist and former slave, is the earliest documented professional african american painter. his sitters were captain john murphy and his wife, irish immigrants who lived in baltimore, where johnson painted many merchants, seamen, and their families.
snchez pays homage to pedro albizu campos (1891-1965), the well-known leader of the puerto rican nationalist party. a harvard-trained lawyer and devout catholic, albizu championed social justice and promoted puerto rican independence.
the drum and the dance is one of twelve prints inspired by pfaffs travels to japan. some of the shapes suggest sound or shock waves; other forms suggest musical scores and miniature solar systems.
b'gathering around microphones as in julia eckel\'s painting, actors and musicians of the 1930s created drama, comedy, and musical performances enjoyed by radio audiences across the country.  president franklin roosevelt explained his decisions to the nation through his famous radio broadcast "fireside chats."'.
at the age of fifteen, julian scott lied about his age to enlist in the union army.  scott imbued this work with respect for his confederate counterpart, sounding a hopeful note for the future.
for her series harpers pictorial history of the civil war (annotated), kara walker appropriated and enlarged select illustration from harpers pictorial history of the civil war, a two-volume publication of 1866. she chose fifteen wood engravings, enlarged them through offset lithography, and overlaid them with large, black stencils.
b'trains, trucks, and industrial buildings were what karl fortess envisioned when the public works of art project suggested that he depict "the american scene." the depression slowed shipping, but a newly invented concrete mixture stimulated the local cement business.
b'susan rothenberg\'s art is distinguished by psychologically charged images, heavily abstracted but still recognizable as living forms. in mezzo fist i the subject appears to be a figure hitting its own face with its fist.
b'for zombie jamboree, morrison drew on a personal lexicon of myths and images.  african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
b'through meticulous research, gonzales-day documented approximately 350 lynching incidents that occurred in california between 1850 and 1935, most of which involved victims of mexican descent. to create the series searching for california hang trees, the artist visited many of these sites and captured the likeness of trees that may have borne witness to these events.
b'this group of photographs is based on historic postcards of california lynching victims that circulated in american culture during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.  regionally inflected words and phrases like cowboy justice and bandito printed on the original postcards contextualize these events.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
a farm scene with green trees would seem to be a positive view of the american scene, but kenjiro nomura's painting suggests a hidden threat. clouds gather and darkness fills the barn and sheds while the foreground road is in shadow.
jasper johns transformed symbols and objects into subjects for art. in gray alphabets, johns filled a grid with a continuous, repeating sequence of the letters a through z.
in washington, d.c., 1975 from his archaeological series, josephson used a six-inch woodworkers contour gauge to represent the shape of the washington monument. b'in the 1960s and 1970s, kenneth josephson, a graduate of the institute of design and a student of harry callahan and aaron siskind, began making works that focused on the act of picture making and offered playful commentary on photographic truth and illusion.
b'juan duran, the new mexican man who posed for this portrait, brings the brilliant light and vivid colors of his native desert landscape into the artists studio with him. the bright colors of duran\'s clothing are reflected in the skin of his broad, strong hands and blunt face.
the black orbs in kenneth youngs untitled abstraction are deceptive. they seem alternately microscopic, like organisms floating in a fluid field, or cosmic, like bits of matter captured in a split second.
b'kerry james marshall combines memories of his upbringing during the civil rights era, with an interest in the way knowledge is collected. sob, sob is emotionally ambiguous-- the figure may be sobbing out of despair or expressing an angry curse as she sits with a book titled africa since 1413.
the title banshee pearls refers to ancient female spirits, the banshees of gaelic folklore whose high-pitched wails presaged a death in the family. she used childhood photographs, prints of her own hair, and impressions from her teeth pressed against the photocopier.
b'kota ezawa made this playful mechanical television in homage to his one-time teacher, nam june paik, and presented it during the museum\'s 2012 celebration of paik\'s birthday.  it is a modest gesture invoking paik\'s presence and his influence on television, on ezawa himself, and on contemporary art.watch this!: revelations in media art, 2015'.
b'kota ezawa samples imagery from a broad range of sources, including news media, popular cinema, and the history of art, which he then distills into flattened landscapes of pure form. lyam 3d refigures alain resnais\'s french new wave film, l\'anne dernire  marienbad (last year at marienbad), released in 1961.
the athlete's dream is a composite of heads and body parts that captures multiple moments in time. although rivers normally made drawings in advance of painting, the athlete's dream has an improvisational, random quality that connects the canvas with the artist's life as a jazz saxophonist.
larry sultan returned to his parents home as an adult, camera in hand, to explore his past. this portrait of his father is simultaneously affectionate and awkward.
in portrait of my father with newspaper, irving sultan reads the los angeles times as light pours in behind him. this carefully composed portrait reveals the artists father almost entirely through reflections and shadows.
b'colorado native laura gilpin made photographs of navaho and pueblo indians and many of the most spectacular sites in the southwest, including archeological ruins.  employing delicate platinum tones and a flat plane of focus, gilpin created a dreamlike landscape.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013'.
b'before embarking on a career in the arts, laurel roth hope worked as both a park ranger and a natural-resource conservator. roth hope displays each suit on a hand-carved pigeon mannequin as a reminder that the animals we most revile are often the ones capable of surviving in a human-made environment.
b'sharing the sentiment of cartoonist bill watterson that, "people who get nostalgic about childhood were obviously never children," lavern kelley\'s piece recalls the perceived captivity of the grade school experience.  "whatever i do, i want it to be my own thoughts and methods, not somebody elses."lavern kelleyexhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006'.
b'a farmer walks behind an old-fashioned horse-drawn plow, cultivating the soil as americans have for generations.  no doubt the farmer\'s work will bring a plentiful harvest; the surrounding vegetation is a deep green, promising that this is fertile land.'.
b'in head i 1961, thick smears of red, white, blue, and brown paint suggest a scarred human face or a colossal carved head worn down by time and weather. golub was one of the "monster roster" of chicago painters whose confrontational images pushed the comfort zone of gallery goers.
leon trousset's painting of mesilla, near las cruces, new mexico, takes us far into the past. spain's king philip ii mandated the appearance of his colonial cities, where priests, tradesmen, and the king's army competed for influence.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
fithian stands before a mirror, admiring the tokens that others have given in praise of her beauty. mrs.
b'in this painting lily furedi boldly did something that few dare to do: she looked at people on the subway.  only two women in the foreground, who obviously know each other, dare to look directly at each other as they talk companionably.'.
in initiation, liberia, she interpreted the sande society initiation ritual. b'jones was especially sensitive to the rights and roles of women.
b'five overlapping masks from different african tribes convey a mysterious spiritual dimension summoned by ritual dance. jones taught at howard university for many years thereafter, encouraging her students to travel to africa to understand its art.
b'at the center of moon masque is a papier-mch replica of a heart-shaped white kwele mask from zaire surrounded by masklike profiles and designs drawn from ethiopian textiles. though stylized, the faces resemble actual individuals whose profiles are juxtaposed with tears falling from the eyes of the mask.
b'jones went to africa for the first time in 1970, at age sixty-five, but the forms, rhythmic cadences, and vibrant color she associated with the ceremonies of africa had infused her art since her student years.  these influences are apparent in self portrait, in which jones links her identity with traditional african sculpture.\nafrican american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
and lo! in tangier we have found it." 

influenced by twain, louis comfort tiffany visited north africa in 1870-71, and his travels inspired a series of paintings exploring his new fascination with islamic art and architecture.tiffany was one of the first american artists to turn east for inspiration.here the citys ancient walls and mixture of classical and islamic architecture provide a calm backdrop for the citys lively marketplace.
b'lozowicks fascination with bridges echoes the technological optimism that swept across america after world war i. he also believed that such subjects offered the opportunity to combine abstraction and representation in his art.  lozowick said, there is no theoretical reason why the technical gains of abstraction cannot be used in the representation of an actual scene if the graphic artist can avoid the danger of ornamental abstraction on the one hand and photographic realism on the other, if he can apply the force of new technical equipment to the wealth of new themes, no prospect for what he might accomplish would be too hopeful.graphic masters ii: highlights from the smithsonian american art museum, 2009'.
b'gas is an expressionist, world war i drama by the german playwright georg kaiser about a rebellion at a plant producing poison gas. lozowick designed the stage set for marion gerins 1926 production of this play at the goodman theatre in chicago, and this is one of several preparatory drawings.
the illusion of timeworn wood conveyed by the cast bronze of gate v suggests a once beautiful garden that is now overgrown and wild. but even [then], theres activity. . . .patterns of life change, but life doesnt change.
louise nevelson aimed at something that she called order, rightness, or spiritual essence. sky totem is a flattened tower made from pieces of molding and scrap wood.
lucas samaras, who is also known for sculptures and sewn-fabric paintings, began making polaroid photographs in 1969.  a democracy of images: photographs of the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
b'azacetas self-described apocalyptic pop paintings are allegories of a blighted period in the history of new york city.  the unwelcoming title  no parking here any time  also expresses the artists feelings of displacement after departure from cuba.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'luis cruz azaceta, who immigrated to the united states from havana during the cuban revolution, began a series he called shifting states after seeing news coverage of the uprisings in the middle east collectively referred to as the arab spring.  for azaceta, this series "maps a new terrain" of our uncertain, current times. '.
b'luis jimnez began making monumental sculptures in the midst of the latino civil rights movement. spaniards brought cattle and horses [to north america], the artist once recalled, and mexicans developed the whole notion of being cowboys.
malcah zeldis refers to this painting as an "exultation of survival," painted after her recovery from cancer in 1986, the same year as the centennial celebration of the statue of liberty.  she includes herself (in the red dress at the lower right) alongside american icons like elvis and miss america in a celebration of liberty and lifepersonally from her sickness, and universally for the diversity of americans.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
b'johnson painted brothers in the rolling foothills of the blue ridge mountains outside charlottesville, virginia. during his career, johnson moved easily between explorations of modernist composition and what was then known as "racial art" -- art that paid homage to contemporary african american life and its ancestral roots.
b'the compressed space in self-portrait speaks to johnson\'s profound awareness of modernist compositional devices.  ironically, the year proved to be johnson\'s most prolific but also the last of his short life.\nafrican american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012\n'.
through his experiments with photographic processes and chance operations, man ray demonstrated the dynamic power of light and electricity. instead, man ray placed the fan, blades spinning, inside a darkroom in front of photosensitive paper, and then exposed the paper to light.
"i drew on top of the photograph," acevedo reflected, "to transform the bleakness of underutilized landscapes into visionary architectural proposals." b'at left, a "do not enter" sign turns away passers-by from a deteriorating street corner.
b'acevedo combines photography and drawing to proffer an ambivalent account of life in urban america. this triptych captures views of an abandoned lot in a puerto rican neighborhood in hartford, connecticut.
b'the defiant figure in pariah wears an indigenous amulet and has wavy black hair that suggests african ancestry. dimas depicted his monumental figure using a range of paintings styles associated with abstract art that flourished in new york during and after the 1950s.
b'cabreras vinyl sculptures take the form of appliances assembled in mexican factories and sold to u.s. consumers.  the strings used to bind the vinyl are left long and exposed, reminders of the labor involved in producing appliances found in many american homes.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'while preparing this installation brito remembered the well-known childrens song called el patio de mi casa (the backyard of my house). in britos backyard, nature struggles to survive the uprooting of migration, here symbolized by the constricting cradle, barren tree shadows, and the cracked ground.
b'campos-ponss braided and dreadlocked hair, which meanders across the multipaneled composition, takes the shape of a spiral constellation, or a nest, the temporary home of migrating birds.  each photograph can be read as a dreamy landscape or a lyrical trace of diasporic memories.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'born in cuba, raised in puerto rico, and now living in miami, martnez-caas assembled the pieces of her multifaceted identity into a totem by using a complex photographic process.  these hybrid forms announce her multiple cultural connections and recall the paintings of cuban artist wilfredo lam.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
great aunts, grandma annas funeral, birmingham, alabama may have triggered nances initial interest in spirituality. she knew that the people she met at her grandmothers funeral were family, but, she wrote, i didnt know who they were or how i was related.
in 1981, nance traveled to beaufort county, south carolina, to photograph the people of oyotunji village, a small community founded in 1970 that combined black nationalist ideology with aspects of yoruba and fon (nigerian) culture. nance shot and printed the photograph with the crisp tonality characteristic of the documentary style for which she is well known.
marilyn nance is an award-winning photojournalist who has photographed the black indians of new orleans, folk musicians in appalachia, the first black church in america, and served as staff photographer for the north american zone of festac 77, the african arts and cultural festival held in lagos, nigeria.  nances photographs of the spiritual culture have twice earned her nominations as a finalist for the w. eugene smith award in humanistic photography, and she was the 1989 and 2000 recipient of the new york foundation for the arts fellowship in photography.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012.
b'the text of the eighth amendment to the u.s. constitution is buried under layers of brightly colored paper.  mark bradford invokes the amendment\'s protective words, only to render them illegible.'.
b'mark lombardi traced the uses and abuses of power, and especially financial and political fraud, in intricate drawings he described as "narrative structures." inner sanctum tracks an international scandal in which backhanded deals, money-laundering, and several mysterious deaths were linked to the vatican bank in the 1960s and \'70s.
mark newport knits costumes for superheroes such as batman, superman, and spiderman. this is evident in newport's prints, which are visual narratives about characters wearing his costumes.
abstraction and spirituality are intimately entwined in the delicate works of mark tobey, whom, along with morris graves, life magazine described as a mystical painter. tobey acknowledged that the abstract harmony of music was an important source of inspiration: when i play the piano for several hours, everything is clarified in my visual imagination afterwards.
b'during his visit to mexico city in 1932, marsden hartley was entranced by the two snow-capped volcanoes, popocatpetl and ixtaccihuatl, surrounding the city. according to legend, a tlaxcaltecas chief promised the hand of his beautiful daughter iztacc to the brave warrior popo.
b'this simple, timeless winter scene of a man walking through a snowy wood is probably set near woodstock, new york, the rural artists\' colony where martha levy made paintings similar to this unsigned work. does this hunter, with no game in hand, have a family at home waiting anxiously for him to return with meat?.
in semiotics of the kitchen, martha rosler performs for the camera as a culinary hostess introducing various kitchen utensils. created in 1975, semiotics of the kitchen remains one of the most influential works of both feminist and conceptual art.
cane, by jean toomer, is a book of prose and poetry and a masterpiece of african-american literature by one of the leading writers of the harlem renaissance. leon litwack, a historian of the black experience in america, writes: even in the absence of narrative continuity, cane has a cohesion, an aesthetic unity, a thread that binds the various vignettes and stories together.
one of the most important american sculptors working today, martin puryear is known for his handmade constructions, primarily in wood. still others read the form as a human head containing two symbols of written language, a visual metaphor for abstract thought.
martin ramrez was among many mexicans lured to america in the 1920s by the promise of work. but in 1931, he was detained for vagrancy and subsequently admitted to a psychiatric hospital where he was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
b'most families assemble photo albumsscrapbooks brimming with the faces of relatives dimly remembered, photographs of parents looking younger than we ever knew them, or images of ourselves as childrenthat create a loosely assembled history. rather than drawing on her own familys past, however, martina lopez collaged pictures of anonymous individuals she found in second-hand stores into digitally created tableaux that are at once familiar and haunting.
b'the works progress administration commissioned automotive industry for a library in detroit, the automobile capital of the world. at the very center of this mural is a cutaway view of an engine, showing the piston arm pushing down and around the crankshaft to turn the wheels.
masami teraoka came to california from japan when he was twenty-five years old. his works reflect the japanese ukiyo-e, or floating world, block prints of the nineteenth century and the american appetite for "painting big.".
b'tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
b'tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
b'tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
b'tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
b'tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
b'the complex of arcs, diagonals, and circles within circles give untitled the look of a landscape seen from above. golubov, who had immigrated with his family from tsarist russia when he was twelve, said he had no theories about art.
b'the london-born artist max cohn often painted new york industrial scenes like this one, showing the men and machines that kept the great city working. in this painting the viewer looks up from a pier at the dark silhouette of a coal tower standing over a coal-laden barge.
weber was in paris from 1905 to 1908, soaking up the artistic styles of picasso, matisse, and cezanne. weber came back to the states convinced that his personal, expressive art was as important as the work of the academic painters who dominated the market.
tobacco rose conjures a pinup girl from the colorful world of commercial advertising. mel ramos riffed on the common tactic of using overt sexuality to sell consumer products.
b'in the early 1970s, chicano activists successfully lobbied the frito-lay company to remove the frito bandito from public circulation. this figure, which was the advertising mascot for frito-lay corn chips, became the centerpiece of casas pop-styled painting humanscape 62.
tambo is a sculpture of allusion and history, an assemblage of steel implements that speak to their original industrial origins, and to metaphorical possibilities.  the i-beam fragments and wrenches allude to tambos efforts to repair society; the shovel and spear symbolically honor the son of peasant farmers who devoted his life to securing equality for south africas black residents.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
twenty years after painting the creeks, goldberg said he finally realized that he had always been concerned with the human architectural response to nature and nature itself. b'the creeks is named for a sixty-acre estate in east hampton, new york, which served as a summer gathering place for abstract painters in the 1950s, although it contains no recognizable references to either the house or the extensive gardens.
b'in caribbean popular culture, plantains can signify maligned african ancestry, masculinity, and national sovereignty. luciano observed that for latino youth this icon functioned as a badge of pride that announces their cultural roots.
these ramshackle tenements were home to poor families in the bunker hill neighborhood of downtown los angeles during the great depression. millard sheets, an up-and-coming young california artist, enjoyed drawing and painting the people and houses of this colorful neighborhood.
since 1970 jennifer bartlett has reworked this iconic emblem of a "house"--a triangle atop a rectangle--to explore how rules and systems govern our lives. close inspection reveals that each dot is unique in shape and character, further destabilizing the picture's tight, organizing grid.
in airlie oak, evans honored an immense 400-year-old tree at airlie; a live oak over twenty-feet-wide at the base. b'minnie evans lived most of her life in north carolina.
surfaces reveal inner states  cameras record surfaces. minor white, 1969minor white continued alfred stieglitzs tradition of treating photographs as equivalents, visual metaphors for feelings or psychological states.
b'wind turbines outnumber people in the tiny town of blairsburg, iowa; their massive rotating blades redefine the horizon in this part of the heartland.  this photograph and others in epstein\'s american power series contemplate the relationship between energy production and american society and the ongoing debate about power sources and the realities of climate change. '.
the yards in this title refer to the union stock yards near a residential neighborhood in chicago. siporins father was a union organizer, and the artist was especially sensitive to the plight of the homeless and dispossessed during the great depression.
b'as a master of contemplative, spiritual expression, graves used natural forms to symbolize his state of mind and inner vision. the bird with folded wings seems to emerge from his transcendent imagination, the artists inner eye, rather than from direct observation.
b'stadium lighting was still rare in 1934 when artist morris kantor saw this night baseball game in west nyack, new york. major league baseball would not begin night games until 1935.
b'faces creates a world of depth, movement, and beautiful colors hiding behind a shadowy membrane. in 1959, however, the "illusion" of anything was scorned by many in the art world who insisted that painting should be purely abstract and only about the act of painting.
imagination), collecting cast-off items and transforming them into uplifting artworks lies at the heart of their creativity. for artists like greg warmack (mr.
b'hasbun captures pictures within pictures and overlays multiple exposures in one print to explore the events that compelled her family to migrate. the central photo in one scene shows her great-grandfather in front of the greek orthodox altar he built in el salvador after he fled there from palestine.
the x post facto (quis annimo) series is based on an archive of x-rays hasbun discovered in her fathers office. for hasbun, her re-imagined x-ray photographs, made by enlarging and reprinting the original negatives, are documents turned into metaphors of complex lives and social histories.
b'bez focused her gaze on a lush field of plantain trees, a crop long wedded to concepts of puerto rican identity and sovereignty.  bezs belief in puerto rican independence manifests in her impulse to look, depict, and therefore possess the islands landscape on her own terms.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
9/23/69: experiment with david atwood was created while nam june paik was artist-in-residence at wgbh, a public-television station in boston. the title refers to the date paik orchestrated this spontaneous performance in which he composed a myriad of televisual and musical scores into a stunning electronic display.
paik was the first to use the phrase "electronic superhighway," and this installation proposes that electronic media provide us with what we used to leave home to discover. but electronic superhighway is real.
nam june paik's t.v. clock transforms time into a sculptural electronic object.  nam june paik exhibited many versions of t.v. clock.watch this!: revelations in media art, 2015.
nancy graves sculpted this deceptively realistic skeleton based on the internal structure of a camel. b'pleistocene skeleton plays with perceptions of what is natural and what is invented.
b'nancy grossman grew up with horses on a farm in oneonta, new york, where she worked with equestrian gear that later became a staple in her art.  concerned with the repression of the psyche, grossman addresses the dehumanization of the individual in the contemporary world.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'in the 1960s grossman began carving fetishistic wooden heads that she painted then covered in leather.  grossman speaks here to choice: nature gives us one face, she says; we make ourselves another.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
 as the video progresses, images become distorted and compressed, offering a moving message about the human experience and the fugitive nature of memory. ' b'underscan draws its name from a process used in video editing in which edges of the image are compressed--a technique the artist uses here to reflect on the limits of time.
b'susan rothenberg\'s art is distinguished by psychologically charged images, heavily abstracted but still recognizable as living forms. in mezzo fist i the subject appears to be a figure hitting its own face with its fist.
b'edward and nancy reddin kienholz collected furniture, fixtures, wallpaper, and personal effects from the pedicord hotel in spokane, washington. an old man in boxer shorts appears in three moments that describe an ordinary day in his life.
the figure in man with a hat, cane and glove stands frontally, the formality of his posture and clothing humanized by his crooked tie, a charming imperfection in his otherwise dapper appearance. in describing his process of completing a painting, oliveira said, when i reach that point where the painting comes alive, then i step away.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
he has continued to photograph the brown sisters, lined up in the same order, every year since. in 1975, nicholas nixon made a photograph of his wife, bebe, with her three sisters at a brown family gathering, which became the starting point for one of the most remarkable portrait series of our time.
b'nick cave\'s training as a fiber artist and dancer inspired his ongoing series of soundsuits. named for the rustling cave heard as he moved around in his first suit, these wearable sculptures combine performance and textile art.
b'lewis often asserted that art was not a tool for solving societys problems, but evening rendezvous is a deeply political painting.  the combination of red, white, and blue mocks the patriotism that the klan claimed as its defense.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
link took most of his railroad photographs at night, developing new techniques for flash photography and dramatic lighting. b'when the norfolk and western railway company announced its conversion from steam to diesel locomotives in 1955, o. winston link, an industrial photographer, began to document the line that would ultimately mark the end of the steam era in the united states.
b'in radiante, albizu rhythmically applied large blocks of pigment against a yellow background to orchestrate what she called a conversation between color and form. one of the first puerto rican artists to embrace abstraction, albizu studied with painter esteban vicente before moving to new york city.
wood had served under nelson miles, the army officer ordered to capture chief joseph, leader of the nez perce. wood copied down the chiefs words, and was so disgusted by the governments indian policies that he resigned his army commission.
wood had served under nelson miles, the army officer ordered to capture chief joseph, leader of the nez perce. wood copied down the chiefs words, and was so disgusted by the governments indian policies that he resigned his army commission.
wood had served under nelson miles, the army officer ordered to capture chief joseph, leader of the nez perce. chief joseph, who had invited woods son to live for a while among his people, sat for his portrait in warners portland, oregon, studio.
wood had served under nelson miles, the army officer ordered to capture chief joseph, leader of the nez perce. wood copied down the chiefs words, and was so disgusted by the governments indian policies that he resigned his army commission.
wood had served under nelson miles, the army officer ordered to capture chief joseph, leader of the nez perce. chief joseph, who had invited woods son to live for a while among his people, sat for his portrait in warners portland, oregon, studio.
mchicano art center mural at echo park lake records artists painting an outdoor mural that suggests a pyramid. parked outside is a vintage lowrider, a major signifier of chicano urban culture.
b'like many folk artists, otesia harper learned her craft from an older family memberin this case, her grandmother.  the word "covers" also playfully alludes to the function of her quilt.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006'.
a stately russian wolfhound recruited for this portrait accentuates the poise and glamour of lillian evans tibbs.  his portrait of lillian evans tibbs was designed to reveal her personality, rather than to promote her celebrity status.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
nam june paik's t.v. clock transforms time into a sculptural electronic object. in this seminal work of art, paik rendered the hours through a single line drawn in electric light on a modified tv screen.
the now-defunct conceptual art group asco coined the phrase no movie to refer to their fabricated film stills of nonexistent films. one such production,  la mode, features a glamorous patssi valdez sandwiched between two men (gronk and harry gamboa) as if to suggest a love-triangle movie plot.
a traveler with a suitcase seated at a caf table observes a soldier in uniform, who looks toward a strolling woman. b'night in bologna is a provocative scene.
b'paul caranicas discovered a surreal beauty in the abandoned, block-like shells of world war ii defensive bunkers along the us and french coastlines. in fort tilden ii, the viewer, like the soldiers who once kept watch, looks out from deep within the interior.
ramirezs painting activates biomorphic forms within the tight confines of a square canvas. the implied movement is further intensified when this painting  which is mounted on a turntable  is allowed to spin.
artist paul kauvar smith portrayed the brown rocks of the central mountain, taylor peak, as red as if they were illuminated by a sunset. this stunning colorado view is one that hikers in rocky mountain national park can see to this day.
a few years earlier artist paul kirtland mays had painted fantastic visions on the walls of hollywood movie palaces like the paramount theatre and grauman\'s theatre. the frustrated ape at the center of the painting is reminiscent of the chimps in the tarzan movies.
b'in greek mythology, the lovely swift-footed maiden atalanta could run faster than all others. because a prophecy warned her to avoid marriage, she challenged each of her suitors to a footrace death being the penalty for defeat.
b'manship created sketch of egyptian jackals while touring egypt in 1924. in this drawing, he mimicked the outline drawing technique of ancient egypt in order to capture the jackals he found on tomb decorations in cairo.
although the girl in swing appears to be a spontaneous impression, wonner sketched the composition in advance, then cropped the image to give the scene its you-are-there immediacy. in the final version, wonner added the seated figure, pushed the swing hard against the left edge, added a small table, and allowed the field of yellow-green paint at the right to command almost half the surface.
when osorio worked as a social worker in new york city he often saw elaborate chandeliers hanging in humble apartment homes.  spanish and english mingle in the works title, conjuring a space between cultures and realities.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013.
b'a key figure in the history of video art, peter campus explores the novelties of the electronic image and the transformative characteristics of video. here campus presents a tightly cropped and stationary portrait of a man\'s face, deliberately lit and framed for dramatic effect.
b'black dice is based on a still photograph derived from an english gangster film of that name. the photograph represents a split second from a longer, continuous narrative.
early in his career, peter saul abandoned abstract expressionism in favor of vigorous figuration with vulgar and violent subject matter. he adopted the stance of an intellectual outsider and provocateur, drawing and painting ordinary objects in his apartment  iceboxes, bathroom fixtures, food, knives  with carefree abandon.
b'evergoods art reflected a deep commitment to social equality and sympathy for human frailty. recollecting the genesis of dowager in a wheelchair, he wrote, once i saw a tragic old lady being wheeled on madison avenue.
b'painter iii is an anxious, agitated painting that was completed shortly before guston rejected abstraction and returned to recognizable imagery.  modern masters: midcentury abstraction from the smithsonian american art museum, 2008\n'.
b'philip guston made a name for himself as an abstract expressionist, but by the late 1960s he had grown weary of "all that purity." transition shows guston hiding behind a canvas, as if taking refuge from the blast of bad press he received after his new work was shown in 1970.
philip pearlstein is among a group of american artists who breathed new life into figuration in the 1960s, taking a traditional genre and making it shockingly modern. typical of pearlstein's compositions, the two models here appear cropped within the confines of the canvas.
purvis young was a native of miami, florida, who created a unique art environment in the neighborhood of overtown. in 1971, young decided to make a statement in his downtrodden neighborhood after being inspired by murals made by african-american activists in chicago and detroit.
b'\n\n\nin hindsight is always 20/20, luke dubois took the state of the union addresses from each presidency and sorts them according to word frequency. the traditional eye chart includes sixty-six letters; luke duboiss charts substitute sixty-six words.
b'\n\n\nin hindsight is always 20/20, luke dubois took the state of the union addresses from each presidency and sorts them according to word frequency. the traditional eye chart includes sixty-six letters; luke duboiss charts substitute sixty-six words.
after migrating to miami in 1962 in the wake of the cuban revolution, soriano embarked on a new semiabstract visual vocabulary that helped him transform his feelings of nostalgia for home and country into a creative process of spiritual renewal.  the fiery yellows, radiant oranges, and rich browns suggest the sultry climate of the caribbean, but the fantastic quality of the landscape indicates a personal journey into undiscovered realms dense with cosmic undertones.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013.
b'by the mid-1960s, fasanella was disheartened by the arrogance and self-centeredness that, to him, defined the counterculture movement. fasanella felt the elitist art world had pigeonholed him as primitive and stupid.
b'beginning in the 1860s, vast reserves of midwestern grain were shipped across the great lakes to buffalo, where as many as 280 million bushels a year were stored and milled. crawford grew up in the city and shipped aboard great lakes freighters with his father.
ortiz produced experimental works in which he used existing films as the raw material for his own art.  his destructive act also criticized media depictions of native americans.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013.
raphael montaez ortiz appropriates 16mm newsreel footage describing, as the title indicates, the game of golf.  the result presents bold, white circular voids in the image and asserts the artists presence.watch this!: revelations in media art, 2015.
raphaelle peale's father, charles willson peale, urged his son to paint portraits instead of still lifes, which brought an artist less prestige and fewer commissions. but still lifes suited raphaelle, who also worked as a taxidermist.
artist ray strong painted looking north from the san francisco side to the hills of marin county, where the first bright orange tower rises. this panoramic depiction of the golden gate bridge under construction pays tribute to the ambitious feat of engineering required to span the mouth of san francisco bay.
b'the lines and shapes of monument to sound suggest an interior space where sound waves take visible form, a sanctuary for the imagination. the artist explained his dedication to abstraction based on science and spiritual values: around us we have realism, strife, pain, and greed.
from wood fires to hydroelectricity, raymond skolfield's painting tells how power shaped the town of proctor, vermont. but as skolfield points out in his painting, more old-fashioned, natural sources of power persisted as well.
the colonels cabinet is a narrative of exploration and memory that traces the life of one colonel frank. like the gentleman travelers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who created cabinets of curiosities filled with artifacts of distant people and places, the fictitious colonel frank collected small treasures to remind himself of where he had been and individuals he had met.
b'during the summer of 1936, walker evans joined writer james agee in rural alabama to work on a magazine assignment on cotton farming. it contains some of the most iconic and contentious photographs to document the great depression.kitchen wall, alabama farmstead reads like a modern novel.
 ocean park, no. 6 is an early painting in a series diebenkorn went on to pursue in more than one hundred artworks.' b'in ocean park, no. 6, overlapping planes of color suggest richard diebenkorn\'s view from above as he flew over southern california, noting the "ghosts of former tilled fields [and] patches of land being eroded.".
b'in 1975, hunt was invited by the container corporation of america to create a sculpture for the great ideas project, a program that commissioned artists to interpret the writings of the worlds eminent thinkers. hunt chose a passage from nathaniel hawthornes novel, the blithedale romance (1852), as his title and theme.
b'richard merkin was a quintessential new yorker whose paintings and illustrations celebrated america of the 1920s and 1930s. a socialite and self-proclaimed dandy, merkin did almost three hundred illustrations for the new yorker.
in morning combines two one-liners that richard prince appropriated from published sources and copied in a stream of messy block lettering that fills the center of the canvas from edge to edge.  in place of a pictorial illustration, prince explores the suggestive power of words, and exposes subversive messages behind the comical texts. .
robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011.
robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011.
robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011.
robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011.
robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011.
b'the angular grace of blackberry woman speaks of stoicism and constancy. the subject  an african american woman in a simple dress who is balancing a basket on her head  is one barth may well have seen on market day as a boy growing up in bay st.
b'robert miller\'s painting of a pennsylvania farm amid snow-covered hills seems the very picture of cold rural silence. yet the sky is a rich blue, and the barn and house glow in warm tones of red and yellow.
b'as both a photographer and writer, robert adams is committed to describing the western american landscape as both awe-inspiring and scarred by man. in new housing, longmont, colorado, adams contrasted the vast space of the distant landscape view with a foreground image of the wall of a newly constructed suburban tract house.
b'arneson said that he created his self-portraits because "i can poke fun at myself, i know myself better than anyone else, and i\'m free." he undercuts an image of classical beauty on one side of the column with a frank depiction of his middle-aged body and shaggy face on the other.
b'america looks out at the world from the eyes of a child in this painting robert brackman made for the public works of art project. this african american child afforded the artist, an immigrant from russia, a very different view of the american scene.
b'thomas hopkinson wears a full-bottomed wig and a sword, and he stands before a balustrade and a grove of pruned cypresses. hopkinson was also an ambitious citizen of a new society interested in new discoveries.
 with the figure five, indiana acknowledged his debt to earlier artists whose work, like his, merged high culture and low.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006' but the numbers also symbolize the thirty-five years that lay between indiana\'s painting and demuth\'s earlier version.
b'in the 1960s, the word love became a touchstone for americas hippie movement and robert indianas composition was widely accepted as a symbol of its progressive aspirations. indiana originally made the work as a christmas card in 1965 and later made prints, sculptures, and paintings based on the design.
b'smoke fills the air as fireworks stream down on a louisville parking lot. marking the nations bicentennial in 1976, robert hower juxtaposed two distinctly american traditions: fourth of july fireworks and automobiles.
b'cropped to focus on a single dockworker, laborer (stevedore longshoreman, norfolk, virginia) shows not the labor but the waiting, which sometimes lasted for days because the men were not permitted on the pier until called to work.  the look says, what the hell are you doing photographing me, remarked mcneill, and i think it says a lot more.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
b'in 1937, after enrolling at the new york institute of photography, mcneill did a series on black domestic workers for fortune magazine.  when fortune rejected the pictures, flash!, a magazine aimed at middleclass black readers, published them as a thirteen-photograph feature.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
b'mcneill was hired to take photographs for the publication the negro in virginia, one of more than a dozen undertakings on the subject of black life and history launched by the federal writers project in the late 1930s. using text by african american authors, interviews with former slaves, statistical surveys, and photographs, the project sought to dispel myths about slavery and focus attention on the contemporary lives of black virginians.
b'in 1938, twenty-year-old robert mcneill was hired to take photographs for the negro in virginia, one of more than a dozen black-oriented history projects launched by the new deal federal writers project in the late 1930s. with a three-and-a-half week deadline and a small amount of film, mcneill had to choose his shots carefully.
b'the black stripes at the right of figure in black (girl with stripes) can be read as long, painted strokes executed by a figure who looks directly out at the viewer. in it motherwell asserts the primal act of the artist and links the simple black stick figure with prehistoric painters who applied marks to the walls of ancient caves.
b'motherwell painted this work while listening to the music of charles ives, an american composer whose unexpected chords and musical phrases suggest images and impressions that we almost, but cant quite, identify.  motherwell dedicated the painting to ives because he felt the composer understood the difficulty of making modern art that moves its audience without explaining why.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006'.
b'throughout his career, motherwell infused his work with human themes, autobiographical allusions, and elegies of human loss and struggle. for him wall painting iii was both epic and joyous.
in mark, robert rauschenberg used clippings about current events to comment on the politics of war. president lyndon b. johnson, who increased u.s. involvement in vietnam in 1963, addresses the public through a television screen.
b'robert seldon duncanson was americas best known african american painter in the years surrounding the civil war.  duncansons vision of rural america as arcadia, a landscape akin to paradise, is a characteristic feature of his work, a late hope for peace before the onset of civil war. '.
b'robert duncanson\'s patrons in cincinnati sponsored his first trip to europe in 1853, allowing him to participate in a rite of passage for american artists.  such fanciful depictions were popular among nineteenth-century american patrons, who made the ancient city at the foot of vesuvius a stop on their grand tours.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006'.
b'a group of cincinnati abolitionists recognized the talent of african american artist robert duncanson, bought his works, and sponsored his trips to europe. tiny figures stand on the far banks of the river, and beyond them lies a dreamlike landscape of mountains and farms.
during the 1950s, robert vickrey painted, made experimental films, and traveled around the world doing sketches for time magazine. throughout his work he assumed the perspective of the detached observer but said that to the careful viewer his paintings always [convey] a sense of danger.
b'roberto chavez painted this work from memory. he recalled, "tamalito, whose real name i never knew, was one of the vatos [young guys] from \'el hoyo,\' the neighborhood directly west and north of where i hung out.
b'this work\'s title, natural bridge, refers to a sandstone formation in roger brown\'s home state of alabama.  not much is "natural" at the natural bridge, where couples stroll through a flattened landscape and manicured shrubs radiate a curious neon glow. '.
b'roger medearis completed this painting of his grandmother susan carns medearis at the end of a three years\' study with thomas hart benton at the kansas city art institute. medearis used the sunporch of his father\'s church as a makeshift studio to create detailed sketches of his grandmother, who had suffered a stroke several years earlier.
b'a back story is always featured in freemans photographs, providing an implicit chronicle that links the people in his pictures with a larger narrative.  bikers take a break is not only an image of hip young men showing off lean bodies, it is also a reminiscence of black baltimoreans coming together on sunday afternoons for the beating of the drums, an informal gathering that serves as a reminder of a time in history when drumming was banned by slave owners because it kept alive the legacy of african culture.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
b'the baltimore horse-cart vendors known as arabbers hold a special place in freemans early development  so much that he dedicated an entire project to an exploration of their lives. paul hots watkins is an intimate photographic portrayal of one member of this hard-working and now virtually extinct group in baltimore.
b'freeman has been on the streets since he was an eight-year-old who skipped school to ride the baltimore trolleys. concerned that back-alley life would lead to trouble, his mother sent him to live on a tobacco farm in southern maryland.
b'azales blanches was one of brooks\'s first paintings of the female nude and the earliest in which she presented an openly erotic figure.  audience members also recognized brooks\'s challenge; a reviewer compared it to douard manet\'s iconic modern nude olympia (1863).\nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016'.
 the heavy atmospheric mood tinged with melancholy suggests, but doesn\'t reveal, this woman\'s internal reverie.\nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016' b'like many of brooks\'s early paintings, the charwoman focuses on the woman\'s feminine costume.
 the animal lends an air of exoticism, sensuality, and humor to this forthright portrait. \nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016' brooks pairs the baroness with an uncaged ocelot, whose spotted coat and direct gaze echo the sitter\'s own.
b'in la france croise, brooks voiced her opposition to world war i and raised money for the red cross and french relief organizations.  this award is visible as the bright red spot on brooks\'s lapel in her 1923 self-portrait.\nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016'.
b'la jaquette rouge presents a female nude in a domestic setting. although the figure is not overtly sexual, brooks heightened the implicit eroticism of the scene through the red jacket, which draws attention to the young woman\'s nudity.
b'in le piano, brooks elevated the familiar aesthetic movement theme of a woman listening to music by imbuing the elegant young woman with concentration and focus.  the heavy form of the piano and the large lacquered pot of azaleas compress the space in an intimate view of the sitter, who in her absorption ignores the viewer.\nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016'.
b'peter depicts british painter hannah gluckstein, heir to a catering empire who adopted the genderless professional name gluck in the early 1920s. by the time brooks met her at one of natalie barney\'s literary salons, gluckstein had begun using the name peyter (peter) gluck.
b'renata borgatti, au piano marked an important transition for brooks. borgatti was a professional pianist with whom brooks began a brief affair while living on the island of capri.
b'with this self-portrait, brooks envisioned her modernity as an artist and a person. the modulated shades of gray, stylized forms, and psychological gravity exemplify her deep commitment to aesthetic principles.
b'una troubridge was a british aristocrat, literary translator, and the lover of radclyffe hall, author of the 1928 pathbreaking lesbian novel, the well of loneliness.  her monocle suggested multiple symbolic associations to contemporary british audiences: it alluded to troubridge\'s upper-class status, her englishness, her sense of rebellion, and possibly her lesbian identity.\nthe art of romaine brooks, 2016'.
b'in 1974, bearden created series of five screen prints he titled the prevalence of ritual that presented episodes from greek mythology and stories from the bible through a southern lens. in the garden is an obvious allusion to eve and the garden of eden, but bearden shows the eve figure in the guise of a conjur woman or southern healer.
b'for a series of prints called the prevalence of ritual, bearden reconfigured age-old stories as allegories of modern life. at her mothers urging the young girl requested the head of john the baptist, who had spoken out against her mothers marriage to the king.
b'in july 1963, a month before martin luther kings historic march on washington, bearden and eleven other artists formed a group called spiral to discuss how they could contribute to the civil rights movement. although the composition of mother and child echoes renaissance paintings of the madonna, bearden configured the mothers face as part modern woman and part ife mask.
b'in july 1963, a month before martin luther kings historic march on washington, d.c., bearden and eleven other artists formed a group called spiral to discuss how they could contribute to the civil rights movement. the moment was cathartic for bearden, and he began making collages based on memories of black life in pittsburgh, the rural south, and harlem.
b'text rain is a ground breaking interactive artwork that explores the correspondence between language and the body. jumbling the language of visual representation with the dynamics of spectatorship and interactivity, text rain draws attention to the symbolic codes embedded in our machines, further compounding the spaces we inhabit both virtually and physically.
b'stark hills seem to threaten the lush farms at their feet in this vivid painting of a southern california valley. californian artist ross dickinson dramatized his home states eternal confrontation of nature and man by exaggerating the steep slopes of the hills and the harsh contrast between the dry red wilderness and the green cultivated land.
in the real inside story, cutaway walls conflate inside and outside worlds, and animals and humans seem both toylike and symbolic. b'in the early 1960s, de forest turned from making scrap metal constructions and abstract paintings to works in which animals, totemic images, and fantastical beings engage us with storytelling and game playing.
b'decarava photographed the greats of new yorks jazz scene throughout a career that spanned over half a century. the black-and-white images are intimate and capture the sublime energy of americas preeminent jazz musicians among them john coltrane, elvin jones, duke ellington, and billie holiday.
decarava was born in harlem in 1919. an intensely personal quality distinguishes decaravas photographs, yet his subjects are never removed from the environments they inhabit.
b'in the 1890s, impressionist painter claude monet painted a series of works showing changes of natural light on fields of haystacks. by the time pop art emerged in the 1960s, these well-known paintings existed in the popular imagination as clichs.
b'like other pop artists, roy lichtenstein hoped to eliminate the distinction between "high" and "low" art. he drew inspiration from cartoons and advertisements, adopted the look of mechanical processes, and often borrowed images directly from comic strips.
the subtle color and simplified forms glow with a visual poetry of light and space.  modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
in mandalas, trejo used railroad spikes, a material laden with meaning for the artist, whose father laid train tracks in the midwest.  slightly bent and weathered to a rusty brown, each column of welded spikes evokes bodies caught in the midst of labor.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013.
b'the blacks opened a small rock shop and refreshment stand along the desert highway in california\'s death valley in 1953. their property, affectionately named possum trot, became home to the fantasy doll show.
b'in 1975, garca, who was a vietnam veteran, was drawn to a newsweek cover story about the arrival of vietnamese refugees in the united states.  garcias compelling image invites viewers to confront the injustices of our day.our america: the latino presence in american art, 2013'.
b'sadie benning recorded personal video diaries in the late 1980s and early 1990s while she was in high school. using a toy pixelvision camera made by fisher price, benning speaks to the machine as if she could make it understand.
b'sadie benning recorded personal video diaries in the late 1980s and early 1990s while she was in high school. using a toy pixelvision camera made by fisher price, benning speaks to the machine as if she could make it understand.
b'untitled [appomattox #26] is an elegy to the hundreds of lives lost at appomattox, one of the final battles of the american civil war. sally mann spent two years traveling to battlefields across maryland and virginia, focusing on land where the deadliest combat took place.
b'sam francis had a transnational career, spending significant periods of his life between california, new york, europe, mexico, and japan. the painting is part of a series of predominantly blue works, featuring organic forms, which francis created in the early 1960s as he suffered through hospitalization and convalescence for kidney disease.
aligning the circular shapes at the edges of the sheet while leaving a relatively blank center, francis challenged traditional principles of composition. b'in this composition, drips and spatters of paint lend dynamism to organic forms that are pushed to the sides of the sheet, as if repelled by a magnetic force.
b'gilliam laid down thick paint color over color and then raked the surface to reveal the multiple hues beneath.  its materials  sheet metal, aluminum honeycomb, and industrial-weight paint  allowed no accidents in its construction.african amderican art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
sam gilliam folded, squeezed, and suspended enormous sheets of canvas while the paint was still wet.  today, he remains a vital figure on the national scene, continuing to create paintings that reveal the lyrical and expressive capacity of abstract form.'.
b'the hudson river was a beloved subject for american landscape painters, and this particular site was popular with artists in part due to the dramatic storms that gathered along the ridge of storm king mountain. samuel colman painted both small sailboats and larger steam-powered tourist launches and freight boats, focusing on the changes taking place in commerce and leisure activities on the river.
bill viola explored themes of transformation and transcendence from emotional, philosophical, and spiritual perspectives. in the fall into paradise, a single pixel appears in the void, then slowly expands to reveal two figures entwined in an embrace.
b'saul berman\'s detailed, reportorial painting shows workers busily clearing snow from the new york navy yard during the challenging winter of 19331934.  however, as the empty dry docks along the river in the background show, during the fall and winter of that year new york shipyard workers often had nothing better to do than clear snow.'.
although saul steinberg is best known as the new yorker cartoonist whose fanciful people and animals captured the masquerades of modern life, he was also concerned with the impact of development of the land.  the script as well as the signature and official-looking stamp are indecipherable.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014.
b'garcas lushly painted and drawn works evoke the tragic yet hopeful stories that spur migration. in santo trujillo is dead, garca refers to the assassination of the director rafael trujillo in 1961, which led to the first major exodus of dominicans to the united states.
sean scully says that his stripes "push out into the world, trying to be more than paintings." scully titled this oil after the famous triptych by duccio, a sienese painter of the thirteenth century.
severin roesen's still life celebrates an american harvest and the promise of more to come. roesen was among many germans who fled their country's political troubles of 1848.
b'the defender reflects liptons commitment to finding optimism in the face of lifes challenges. the idea for defender came from a 1949 book by joseph campbell titled the hero with a thousand faces that shaped liptons thoughts about the nature of mankind.
b'sid grossman was best known as an outspoken founder of the new york photo league, where he taught courses in documentary photography. from then on, grossman used these techniques to convey immediacy and movement.
b'sidney goodman based this drawing on the view from his studio window in the philadelphia suburb of elkins park.  the uncomfortable viewpoint reflects his concern about what he called the violated landscape, places in which inanimate structures--- water tanks, dumpsters, utility poles, and out-of-scale buildings--- threaten the harmony of nature.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
 for color bands, he composed a set of drawings and measurements that were executed by a master printmaker. ' b'sol lewitt\'s work explores the near infinite possibilities of color and line.
b'wavy brushstrokes superimposed #1 is part of a set of four serial images based on an idea with permutations determined by rules the artist contrived. lewitt began with a drawing of wavy brushstrokes, which was then photographically transferred to several metal plates and printed as an aquatint.
b'wavy brushstrokes superimposed #2 is part of a set of four serial images based on an idea with permutations determined by rules the artist contrived. lewitt began with a drawing of wavy brushstrokes, which was then photographically transferred to several metal plates and printed as an aquatint.
b'wavy brushstrokes superimposed #3 is part of a set of four serial images based on an idea with permutations determined by rules the artist contrived. lewitt began with a drawing of wavy brushstrokes, which was then photographically transferred to several metal plates and printed as an aquatint.
b'sondra freckelton began her career as a sculptor working with abstract forms but turned to realist painting in the early 1970s.  in harvest, vegetables spill onto an antique quilt, a handmade reminder of the interweaving of generations.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection'.
riveras monumental portraits of puerto ricans in new york (or nuyoricans) counteract the stereotypes that have circulated in the mass media. the artist found her subjects by asking passersby outside her building if they were puerto ricans.
b'in 1940, hayter moved from paris to new york, where he re-established his renowned paris printmaking workshop, atelier 17. amagansett refers to the long island fishing town where hayter, his wife, and two young sons spent time at the shore.
b'the santa monica public library murals were executed with funding from the public works of art project (pwap), a six-month pilot program begun in december 1933.  the series culminates in scenes of the region\'s motion picture industry, representing the fusion of technology and imagination in modern american life.\nspecial delivery: murals for the new deal era, 1988'.
in chamber, the rough texture of the woodcut surface and outlines contribute to the works expressionistic qualities, while the rich colors lend a decorative balance to the composition.  based on one of amenoffs paintings but considerably altered in scale and color, the print is transformed into an independent work of art.multiplicity, 2011.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
over the course of seven days, he tried all the processes available to him at crown point press. john cage began making prints after a long and distinguished career as a musical composer.
b'in a six-panel cycle for the west palm beach post office stevan dohanos illustrated the story of james edward hamilton, a mail carrier who walked a route along the beach between lake worth and miami, florida.  according to one account, he was attacked by alligators while attempting to retrieve a mail skiff in 1887, and lost his life "in the line of duty."\nspecial delivery: murals for the new deal era, 1988'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'robert rauschenberg invited brice marden to make prints in 1972 at his untitled press located on a property adjacent to his home on captive island, florida.  the succession of prints in the series suggests the brief passage of time as marden crossed from house to workshop.multiplicity, 2011'.
b'daviss abstract compositions contain many references to his experiences and observations.  he said, some of the things which have made me want to paint, outside of other paintings, are: american wood and iron work of the past; civil war and skyscraper architecture; the brilliant colors on gasoline stations, chain-store fronts and taxicabs; the music of bach; synthetic chemistry; the poetry of rimbaud; fast travel by train, auto and airplane which brought new and multiple perspectives; electric signs; the landscape and boats of gloucester, mass.; five-and-ten-cent-store kitchen utensils; movies and radio earl hines hot piano and negro jazz music in general.graphic masters ii: highlights from the smithsonian american art museum, 2009'.
b'this work is the only surviving design of the artists demolished mural for the communications building at the worlds fair held in flushing, new york, in 1939. impression of the new york worlds fair is an interpretation of various architectural elements at the fair, such as the perisphere and the trylon, and of stripper gypsy rose lee at center stage.
b'although working with abstracted forms, stuart davis always considered himself a realist and devised a kind of artistic shorthand for this memo about gloucester harbor. ship masts and wharf structures are schematically suggested by intersecting white lines below a white circle that floats like the moon against a night sky.
b'stuart davis believed in the power of abstract art to make people more aware of the world around them. he was convinced that shapes, colors, and sounds taken from the real world and reimagined on canvas offered a new way of experiencing life.
susan rothenberg's art is distinguished by psychologically charged images, heavily abstracted but still recognizable as living forms. in mezzo fist i the subject appears to be a figure hitting its own face with its fist.
susan rothenberg's art is distinguished by psychologically charged images, heavily abstracted but still recognizable as living forms. in mezzo fist i the subject appears to be a figure hitting its own face with its fist.
b'svetlana and igor kopystiansky titled this work after wassily kandinskys theater production of the same name, linking it to a larger history of experimental art forms and invoking the significance of musical performance to the visual arts. here, yellow sound displays found film of a stylus silently playing a record on a turntable.
monster movie is a mesmerizing digital video projection with an aggressive audio track.  murata punched virtual holes through the compressed video file, disrupting the videos logic and revealing a monster beneath the surface of the image.watch this!: revelations in media art, 2015.
b'fernndez favors processed materials and minimalist forms that invite multiple interpretations. nocturnal (horizon line) was inspired by the history of the valley of borrowdale in cumbria, england, where graphite was first mined.
ground rules.  joining references to color field painting with movement on a basketball court, gates merges art and sport with life in a southside chicago community.'.
theodore roszak celebrated the new recording technologies of the 1930s with this light-hearted painted relief. roszak studied music, but chose to pursue a career in art.
the spikey forms of thistle in the dream (to louis sullivan) combine associations of threat and cautious hope. the titles dedication to brilliant but difficult architect louis sullivan reflects roszaks understanding of the visionary role of the complex, often conflicted individual in modern society.
in sea images a sandy "floor" is separated from a dark "sky" by a wavy area of murky black. sea images was purchased the year it was painted for the ss argentina, a passenger ship launched in 1929 that served as a troop ship during world war ii. at the end of the war, the argentina was converted into a luxury liner.
b'elegant and stately, this house was the first private residence designed by benjamin henry latrobe, an architect of the u.s. capitol building in washington.  in 1857 the city of philadelphia acquired the property, demolishing the derelict structure and incorporating the land into fairmont park.'.
to patriotic nineteenth-century americans, the victory of the frigate united states over the british ship macedonian in 1812 marked a triumph against british sea power. b'the rolling waves and swirls of smoke in this painting convey the noise and excitement of battle.
b'thomas cole envisioned america as a new start for civilization.in his mind, the american revolution was like the biblical story of the great flood, sweeping away the despotism of the british crown.in this painting the waters from that flood subside, suggesting a peaceful future for the young republic.a lone skull resting against the rocks suggests that the world has been washed clean of human folly.  at the center of the painting, bathed in light, a dove flies toward land as the ark floats on the calm waters, ready to usher in a new and more enlightened era in america. '.
b'intense colors and writhing forms evoke the contest of muscle and will between hercules and achelous, the greek god who ruled over the rivers. thomas hart benton saw the legend as a parable of his beloved midwest.
b'the landscape where this herdsman sleeps recalls a distant time and place. the torre di schiavi, or tower of slaves, was a popular subject for american artists visiting italy.
b'lower manhattan\'s glorious skyscrapers inspired all new yorkers, including the city\'s artists, through the worst hardships of the great depression. looking from the dock of a harbor island, thomas delbridge showed the dark mouths of manhattan\'s ferry terminals; above them ever taller buildings climb out of red shadows into gold and white sunshine.
b'thomas moran knew from his first sight of the green river (also called the upper colorado) that he had found an ideal theme for the east coast art market. it had popped up overnight as the union pacific railroad stretched across the continent.
the events of september 11, 2001, have left an indelible mark on the physical and emotional landscape of the united states. for jpeg de01, ruff downloaded a digital photograph from the internet and then enlarged it beyond the limits of the original low-resolution file.
wilmington, delaware landowner and cotton merchant daniel la motte appears in the latest london fashion, his stylish clothes and relaxed demeanor reflecting the current style of portraiture popular in england and europe.artist thomas sully had just completed a sojourn to london and paris, returning to philadelphia prepared to paint sitters like la motte as american aristocrats.  his portrait of la motte reflects american ambitions to be a great nation, aspiring to cultural parity with the old world. .
b'dial created top of the line (steel) in response to the los angeles riots of 1992, after a jury acquitted four white policemen in the beating of unarmed black motorist rodney king. bold touches of red suggest violence; black-and-white figures symbolize racial tensions; red, white, and blue strokes, faint notes of patriotism, interweave the canvas in clusters.
tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
tim rollins founded the artist collective k.o.s. (kids of survival) in new york in 1982 with a group of children from his neighborhood in the south bronx. working together with a changing group of underachieving students, rollins has directed numerous art projects that foster collective creativity.
dreams of fortune buried deep in silver mines attracted over 10,000 people to austin, nevada, in the early 1860s.  timothy osullivans photograph illustrates with precision and clarity the scientific findings of this major geological study.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
b'although this image has a snapshot-like feelas if we too were sitting on the bedtina barney, who was one of the first photographers to make oversize prints, works with a large-format view camera. the near life-size scale of her images adds to their sense of immediacy, and the rich colors and busy interior draw us further into the scene.
tom nakashima visited japan for the first time in 1988, inspiring the third generation japanese american to take a deeper look into his heritage. as a form of meditation, painting is a way he explores his relationship with eastern and western cultures, conveyed through autobiographical imagery and a fluid use of symbols.
in still life #12, wesselmann attached commercial images of frosty beverages and freshly cooked food to a painted facsimile of a red-checked tablecloth.  still life #12 recasts old traditions of the nude, the still life, and landscape painting in the hip language of modern american life.exhibition label, smithsonian american art museum, 2006.
b'in familia del mar, the gazes  of the father concentrating on straightening his nets, the mother who watches him work, and the baby facing the photographer  illuminate emotional relationships within the life of the family.  we give it meaning.african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
b'gleatons photographs, and his mission to discover the range and nature of african diasporic life in the americas, are inevitably entangled with issues of racial and cultural identity. but his portraits  gina (mexico) is one, are often frontal and as formal as the images of models and socialites he photographed in the 1970s for british vogue.
b'gleaton has traveled constantly throughout mexico, central america, and to all but three of the countries in south america, photographing people of african ancestry and crafting an alternative iconography of beauty, family, love, &amp; goodness. he says he loves the other, which he defines as people who are separate from dominant cultural groups.
b'traveling the dusty back roads of the americas by bicycle, bus, or in a converted 1972 army ambulance, gleaton sought out communities that bear traces of africas legacy in the new world.  african american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
trevor paglens work presents ideas that deal with secrecy and the workings of the military and intelligence world.  though the work is officially untitled, paglens descriptive phase, predators; indian springs, nv, refers to the presence of distant predator drones in the sky above nevada, in effect asking the viewer to perceive intellectually what is easily visible from the ground.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
he pushes onward with the roll of the little boy\'s drum and the call of his energetic voice. b'the sounds of the civil war resonate from this sculpture.
b'this painting thrusts the viewer deep into a california gold mine where a sweating miner braces one foot against his powerful pneumatic drill. california painter tyrone comfort brings the viewer uncomfortably close to this miner, stripped to his shorts and work boots in the suffocating heat of the mine.
b'ulysses davis carved this relief sculpture for his wife. davis plays with words and form by depicting a hart, or mature male deer, bleating to his mate inside a heart-shaped frame.
the themes of protection and shelter are central to many traditional african american forms, but are perhaps most powerful in the improvisational quilts made by black women throughout the south.  mary lee bendolph, a quilter from gee's bend, alabama, explained, "a woman made utility quilts as fast as she could so her family wouldn't freeze, and she made them as beautiful as she could so her heart wouldn't break." .
improvisational quilts, or those with free-form patterns, are an old, ongoing tradition in african american quilting.  african american quilters improvised with available, worn, and patched-together materials to create great beauty from meager means. .
improvisational quilts, or those with free-form patterns, are an old, ongoing tradition in african american quilting.  african american quilters improvised with available, worn, and patched-together materials to create great beauty from meager means. .
improvisational quilts, or those with free-form patterns, are an old and ongoing tradition in african american quilting.  african american quilters improvised with available, worn, and patched-together materials to create great beauty from meager means.
improvisational quilts, or those with free-form patterns, are an old and ongoing tradition in african american quilting.  african american quilters improvised with available, worn, and patched-together materials to create great beauty from meager means.
the themes of protection and shelter are central to many traditional african american forms, but are perhaps most powerful in the improvisational quilts made by african american women across the south.  mary lee bendolph, a quilter from gee's bend, alabama, explained, "a woman made utility quilts as fast as she could so her family wouldn't freeze, and she made them as beautiful as she could so her heart wouldn't break." .
improvisational quilts, or those with free-form patterns, are an old and ongoing tradition in african-american quilting. moreover, such quilts reveal "home-making" as a defiant, political act by people whose lives beyond the home were marked by oppression.
the themes of protection and shelter are central to many traditional african american forms, but are perhaps most powerful in the improvisational quilts made by black women throughout the south. yet, when the patterns and color combinations must take their cues from what clothes are too worn to wear, the maker's inventiveness takes center stage.
turtle foolishly leaves the river, but tricks coyote into helping him get back home. this carving seems to portray a hopi tale about coyote and turtle.
this simple, timeless winter scene of a man walking through a snowy wood is probably set near woodstock, new york, the rural artists' colony where martha levy made paintings similar to this unsigned work. does this hunter, with no game in hand, have a family at home waiting anxiously for him to return with meat?.
in arroyo landscape, he emphasized the patterns and textures of the land and abstract versions of the distinctive vegetation of the area. b'higgins found inspiration in the dramatic landscape around taos, new mexico, where he lived after 1914.
vik muniz drew portraits of the children of sugar cane workers he met on the caribbean island of st. kitts using sugar crystals on black paper, which he then photographed for the series he called "the sugar children.".
vik muniz drew portraits of the children of sugar cane workers he met on the caribbean island of st. kitts using sugar crystals on black paper, which he then photographed for the series he called "the sugar children.".
vik muniz drew portraits of the children of sugar cane workers he met on the caribbean island of st. kitts using sugar crystals on black paper, which he then photographed for the series he called "the sugar children.".
b'when her eighty-nine-year-old mother was stricken with dementia and no longer able to care for herself, virginia beahan and her husband moved her into their home. a landscape photographer accustomed to traveling extensively, beahan at first found her prospects constrained by these circumstances, but she quickly discovered a new subject for her lens.
b'the act of making photographs opened a new kind of dialogue between virginia beahan and her mother, who suffered from dementia and could no longer care for herself:my mother responded to being photographedshe liked the attention. a natural flirt, that sideof her nature came out in the pictureslike a teenager preening for a date.
this painting captures an everyday, yet deeply poetic moment among new mexico's pueblo indians. ufer was a german migr who brought to america an intense sympathy for ordinary people instilled in him by his socialist family.
b'walton ford\'s tur is an allegory rendered in the style of nineteenth-century naturalists\' illustrations. in ford\'s symbolic painting, the aurochs stands on the edge of a dense forest, and human bones lay before him.
b'in visitation, a large flock of passenger pigeons gorge themselves in a field strewn with fruit and nuts.  ford also notes that the image alludes to the human tendency of blaming victims for their own destruction.the singing &amp; the silence: birds in contemporary art, 2014'.
b'washington allston said that this painting represented "the singleness and unity of friendship." he painted hermia and helena in england when the poet samuel taylor coleridge was reviving shakespeare\'s plays.
the vantage point of levee farms is that of a low-flying bird as it surveys planting fields and a river suffused with the warm light of the california sun.  here, thiebaud toyed with perspective--there is no horizon line, for example--and manipulates space to celebrate the confluence of man in harmony with the natural world.
wayne thiebaud was fascinated by the dramatic vistas and abrupt disjunctions of the san francisco landscape. denying the laws of normal perspective, san francisco west side ridge is a commotion of rectangles, horizontals, and diagonals that thrust downward and obliquely to destabilize streets and urban buildings.
weegee was a freelance photographer who sold lurid photographs of fires, car crashes, deaths, and violent crimes to tabloid newspapers.  weegees spur-of-the-moment photographs captured the quick movement and raucous energy before him.a democracy of images: photographs from the smithsonian american art museum, 2013.
b'consultation with local citizens regarding a mural\'s theme was sometimes insufficient to guarantee a mural\'s success. on completion of the mural, however, citizens rebelled against a permanent reminder of the recurring threat.
b'molasses swamp ii is an imagined landscape of enticing confections. caramel "cottontails" protrude from a bubbling swamp, while oreos, mallomars, and peanut butter cups form a rocky perimeter.
much of will henry stevenss work reflects an appreciation and respect for the natural world, as in this abstracted landscape of trees.  stevens first saw paintings from this period at the freer gallery in washington, dc, around 1912.abstract drawings, 2012.
b'this black-and-white drawing reveals de koonings mastery of the spontaneous gesture. in the service of pure abstraction, his lines move across the surface with a fluency and energy that distinguish his most accomplished work.
like his contemporaries franz kline and jackson pollock, de kooning created works premised on painterly improvisation and gestural form. b'born in the netherlands in 1904, william de kooning came to the united states in 1926 without a passport or visa, and went on to become a defining figure of the new york school.
b'this painting of a tennessee sawmill processing raw tree trunks looks like a straightforward image of a thriving southern industry. for three years, "there was no hard-wood industry.".
b'from an awkward position under a massive overhang, william bell maneuvered his large unwieldy camera to capture the dramatic play of light and shadow on the limestone wall of the opposite cliff. bell made this photograph while working on lieutenant george wheelers geographical surveys west of the 100th meridian.
b'william bell was a philadelphia daguerreotypist who fought at antietam and gettysburg during the civil war. in 1865, he was hired by the newly established army medical museum in washington to document the range of injuries and medical procedures among veterans.
b'william christenberry grew up immersed in the landscape and history of the american south. alabama wall i is a quilt of sorts: a rough homage to the region\'s culture made from found objects including license plates, advertising signs, and corrugated and rusted metal.
b'an ordinary tricycle is made monumental in this playful color photograph. eggleston began experimenting with color photography in the mid-1960s.
b'william henry jackson spent the years between 1870 and 1879 as the official photographer for ferdinand v. hardens u.s. geological and geographical survey of the territories. while working on this federally supported expedition, jackson photographed the largely unsettled western frontier, including the region that is now called yellowstone national park.
b'johnson spent decades traveling the world, searching for the authentic spirit of ordinary people from different cultures. in the late 1930s, he found what he was looking for in his own african american community.
b'early morning work presents a clear narrative: the days chores must be done. though seemingly primitive, the flattened forms and deliberately nave perspective johnson used were informed by years of artistic discipline.
b'in june of 1944, william h. johnson returned to his mother\'s home in florence, south carolina, for the first time in fourteen years. his niece, depicted in li\'l sis, is one of several portraits of family and friends johnson painted during his visit.
b'the brilliant colors and bold stripes recall the multi-stripe designs of west african textiles and the african american tradition of freehand quilting. johnson based lunchtime rest on memories of the south, even though by 1940 he had not visited for many years.
b'sowing presents a simple narrative of farm life suggestive of johnson\'s upbringing in south carolina, but the brilliant palette disguises elements of tension.  a ghost moon in the sky hints at things both visible and unseen.\nafrican american art: harlem renaissance, civil rights era, and beyond, 2012'.
william rimmer based this sculpture of a mortally wounded man on works from ancient greece and rome. rimmer worked as a doctor, and his critics at first accused him of casting the sculpture on a real human body.
a sybil was an ancient prophetic priestess who guarded her writings that foretold the future. the libyan sybil sits contemplating the fate of the african people, after reading the scroll she holds in her left hand.
the wiley family owned the largest distillery in new york city during the years surrounding the revolutionary war. his older sister, elegantly dressed for the occasion, holds on her arm a tame squirrel-- a symbol of her decorum and her suitability for marriage.
b'the now-defunct conceptual art group asco coined the phrase no movie to refer to their fabricated film stills of nonexistent films. one such production,  la mode, features a glamorous patssi valdez sandwiched between two men (gronk and harry gamboa) as if to suggest a love-triangle movie plot.
b'winslow homer created an image of a union sharpshooter while working as an artist-correspondent for harper\'s weekly during the civil war. years after the civil war ended, homer recounted his memory of peering through the scope in a company of union sharpshooters.
b'in 1868, winslow homer took up the subject of people who worked in textile mills. by the time homer created his picture, native-born farmwives and their daughters had long been absent from the mills.
b'a visit from the old mistress captures a tentative encounter in the postwar south. winslow homer composed the work from sketches he had made while traveling through virginia; it conveys a silent tension between two communities seeking to understand their future.
artist winthrop turney created this painting as a fantasy gathering of american wildlife visually spanning his nation from coast to coast. the mural would show urban schoolchildren american animals from a variety of environments.
b'wolf kahn sees his landscapes as meditations on the world. the intense yellow grass and the freely brushed orange barn glowing against dark trees in high summer convey the sleepy beauty of a hot, still day at his studio in vermont.
b'collector sara roby believed that the most effective way to encourage the creation and appreciation of the visual arts in the united states was to acquire the works of living artists and exhibit them to the public, so she set up a foundation.  the sara roby foundation purchased the barricade directly from the artist the year it was painted and included it in the first major show of the its collection, held in 1959 at the whitney museum of american art in new york.modern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
b'although labeled an enemy alien by the u.s. government during world war ii, kuniyoshi affirmed his allegiance to his adopted country by contributing propaganda posters to the war effort. beside him a smaller, sad clown faces the audience/viewer; another, barely visible, peers out from behind a banner.
b'kuniyoshis early drawings were often humorous, and his keen wit and interest in visual and verbal puns are evident in remains of lunch. the artists widow noted that kuniyoshi loved pears and pear sauce.
the strong woman of the title is a circus performer who stands on a stage, french flags entwined at the backdrop.  the mother figure, who may be a stand-in for katherine, affirms her protective relationship with the child, who seems perhaps a symbolic portrayal of the artist himself.\nmodern american realism: the sara roby foundation collection, 2014'.
